Good evening. Welcome to this third and final debate among the three major candidates for President of the United States: Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee; President George Bush, the Republican nominee; and independent candidate Ross Perot.
I am Jim Lehrer, of "The MacNeil NewsHour" on PBS. I will be the moderator for this debate, which is being sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. It will be 90 minutes long. It is happening before an audience on the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing.

The format was conceived by and agreed to by representatives of the Bush and Clinton campaigns. And it is somewhat different than those used in the earlier debates. I will ask questions for the first half under rules that permit followups. A panel of three other journalists will ask questions in the second half under rules that do not. As always, each candidate will have 2 minutes, up to 2 minutes, to make a closing statement. The order of those as well as that for the formal questioning were all determined by a drawing.

Gentlemen, again, welcome. And again, good evening.

It seems, from what some of those voters said at your Richmond debate and from polling and other data, that each of you, fairly or not, faces serious voter concerns about the underlying credibility and believability of what each of you says you would do as President in the next 4 years.

Governor Clinton, in accordance with the draw, those concerns about you are first. You are promising to create jobs, reduce the deficit, reform the health care system, rebuild the infrastructure, guarantee college education for everyone who is qualified, among many other things, all with financial pain only for the very rich. Some people are having trouble, apparently, believing that is possible. Should they have that concern?

Mr. President, a response.

Well, you have roughly one minute. We can loosen that up a little bit. But go ahead.

Mr. Perot, what do you think of the Governor's approach, what he just laid out?

Governor, the word "pain," one of the other leadership things that's put on you is that you don't speak of pain, that you speak of all things -- nobody's going to really have to suffer under your plan. You've heard what Mr. Perot has said. He said to do the things you want to do, you can't do it by just taking the money from the rich. That's what the President says as well. How do you respond to that? The numbers don't add up.

As a practical matter, Mr. President, do you agree with the Governor when he says that the middle class -- the taxes on the middle class -- do your numbers agree that the taxes on the middle class have gone up during the last -- --

Mr. President, when you said just then that you admit your mistakes, and you looked at Governor Clinton and said -- what mistake is it that you want him to admit to?

Governor, is that true?

Mr. Perot, if you were sitting at home now and just heard this exchange about Arkansas, who would you believe?

Why is that a mistake?

What he did as Governor of Arkansas -- --

Governor?

Mr. President, let's move to some of the leadership concerns that have been voiced about you. They relate to something you said in your closing statement in Richmond the other night about the President being the manager of crises, and that relates to an earlier criticism that you began to focus on the economy, on health care, on racial divisions in this country only after they became crises. Is that a fair criticism?

Well, it's just that -- you've spoken to it, I mean, but the idea -- not so much in specifics -- --

-- -- but that it has to be a crisis before it gets your attention.

Do you think that's true, Mr. Perot?

You don't think this is an issue?

Well, then, I'll phrase it differently then. He said the other night in his closing words in Richmond that one of the key things that he believes the American people should decide among the three of you, is who they want in charge if this country gets to a crisis. Now, that's what he said. And the rap on the President is that it's only crisis time that he focuses on some of these things. So my question to you -- we're going to talk about you in a minute.

No, no, no. No, no. But my question to you is -- so, if you have nothing to say about it, fine. I'll go to Governor Clinton. But -- --

All right.

Governor, what do you think?

Mr. President.

We have to talk about Ross Perot now, or he'll get me, I'm sure.

Mr. Perot, on this issue that I have raised at the very beginning and we've been talking about, which is leadership as President of the United States, the concerns -- my reading of it, at least -- my concerns about you, as expressed by folks in the polls and other places, it goes like this: You've got a problem with General Motors. You took over $750 million, and you left. You had a problem in the spring and summer about some personal hits that you took as a potential candidate for President of the United States, and you walked out. Does that say anything relevant to how you would function as President of the United States?

Governor, do you have a response to the staying the course question about Mr. Perot?

Mr. President, do you have a response?

Yes.

Governor, what about that charge that you want it both ways on this issue?

All right.

Mr. Perot, based on your experience at General Motors, where do you come down on this? This has been thrown about, back and forth during this campaign from the very beginning about jobs and CAFE standards.

Just for the record, though, Mr. Perot, I take it then for your answer you do not have a position on whether or not enforcing the CAFE standards will cost jobs in the auto industry.

Okay.

So that means no -- [laughter] -- in other words, you agree with President Bush, is that right?

I wanted -- yes, sir.

Governor, a quick answer on trade, and I want to go on to something else.

Governor -- --

Mr. Perot?

No. Mr. Perot, you're doing fine. Go ahead. Whatever you want to say, say it.

Wait a minute. I was going to ask -- I thought you wanted to respond to what we were talking about.

Mr. President, how do you respond to that? Mr. Perot has made that charge several times, the fact that you have people working in your campaign who are paid foreign lobbyists.

Governor, I'm sorry, but that concludes my time with -- --

All right. Go ahead, quickly. Just very briefly.

I'm going to be in real trouble if I don't bring out -- it's about time -- --

Okay.

All right. Now we're going to bring in three other journalists to ask questions. They are Susan Rook of CNN, Gene Gibbons of Reuters, and Helen Thomas of United Press International.

You thought you'd never get in here, didn't you?

Okay, we are going to continue on the subject of leadership, and the first question goes to Governor Clinton for a 2-minute answer. It will be asked by Helen Thomas. Helen?

Helen Thomas. Governor Clinton, your credibility has come into question because of your different responses on the Vietnam draft. If you had to do it over again, would you put on the Nation's uniform? And, if elected, could you, in good conscience, send someone to war?

A reminder now, we're back on the St. Louis rules, which means that the Governor had his answer, and then each of you will have one minute to respond.

Mr. President.

Your minute is up, sir.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

All right. The next question goes to President Bush, and Gene Gibbons will ask it.

1990 Budget Agreement

Gene Gibbons. Mr. President, you keep saying that you made a mistake in agreeing to a tax increase to get the 1990 budget deal with Congress. But if you hadn't gotten that deal you would have either had to get repeal of the Gramm-Rudman deficit control act or cut defense spending drastically at a time when the country was building up for the Gulf war and decimate domestic discretionary spending, including such things as air traffic control. If you had it to do all over again, sir, which of those alternatives would you choose?

Mr. Perot, one minute.

I'll take responsibility for saying your time is up.

All right.

Governor Clinton, one minute, sir.

All right, Mr. Perot, the question is for you. You have a 2-minute answer, and it will be asked by Susan Rook.

Susan Rook. Mr. Perot, you've talked about going to Washington to do what the people who run this country want you to do. But it is the President's duty to lead and often lead alone. How can you lead if you are forever seeking consensus before you act?

Governor Clinton, one minute.

President Bush, one minute.

All right, we're going to go on to another subject now, and the subject is priorities. And the first question goes to you, President Bush, and Susan will ask it.

President Bush, gentlemen, I acknowledge that all of you have women and ethnic minorities working for you and working with you. But when we look at the circle of the key people closest to you, your inner circle of advisers, we see white men only. Why, and when will that change?

The key people, President Bush.

The key people, the people beyond the glass ceiling.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

Mr. President, when you -- just make sure that everybody knows what's going on here. When you responded directly to Mr. Perot then -- --

-- -- you violated the rule, your rules. Now, I'm willing -- --

No, no, no. I just want to make sure that everybody understands. If you all want to change the rules, we can do it.

All right. Okay.

Okay. But Governor Clinton, you have a minute.

All right. The next question goes to you, Mr. Perot, for 2 minutes. It's a 2-minute question, and Helen will ask it. Helen?

Ms. Thomas. Mr. Perot, what proof do you have that Saddam Hussein was told that he could have -- do you have any actual proof, or are you asking for the papers? And also, I really came in with another question. What is this penchant you have to investigate everyone? Are those accusations correct, investigating your staff, investigating the leaders of the grassroots movement, investigating associates of your family?

Governor Clinton, you have one minute.

Mr. President, you have a moment -- a minute, I'm sorry.

The next question goes to Governor Clinton, and Gene Gibbons will ask it. Gene?

Mr. Gibbons. Governor, an important aspect of leadership is, of course, anticipating problems. During the 1988 campaign, there was little or no mention of the savings and loan crisis that has cost the American people billions and billions of dollars. Now there are rumblings that a commercial bank crisis is on the horizon. Is there such a problem, sir? If so, how bad is it, and what will it cost to clean it up?

President Bush, one minute.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

All right, Mr. Perot. The next question, we're going into a new round here on a category just called "differences." And the question goes to you, Mr. Perot, and Gene will ask it. Gene?

Mr. Gibbons. Mr. Perot, aside from the deficit, what Government policy or policies do you really want to do something about? What really sticks in your craw about conditions in this country, beside the deficit, that you would want to fix as President?

Governor Clinton, you have one minute. Governor.

President Bush, one minute.

Sir?

Yes. Well, to respond to the subject that Mr. Perot mentioned.

The next question goes to Governor Clinton. You have two minutes, Governor, and Susan will ask it.

Governor Clinton, you said that you will raise taxes on the rich, people with incomes of $200,000 a year or higher. A lot of people are saying that you will have to go lower than that, much lower. Will you make a pledge tonight below which -- an income level that you will not go below? I am looking for numbers, sir, not just a concept.

President Bush, you have one minute.

Mr. Perot.

We've got a wash, according to my calculations. We have a wash. And we'll go to Mr. Perot for one minute. In other words, the violation of the rule; that's what I meant.

That's right, you're clean. [Laughter]

This is the last question, and it goes to President Bush for a 2-minute answer. And it will be asked by Helen.

Ms. Thomas. Mr. President, why have you dropped so dramatically in the leadership polls, from the high eighties to the forties? And you have said you will do anything you have to do to get reelected. What can you do in 2 weeks to win reelection?

Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

Mr. Perot, you have -- sorry. Excuse me, sir. Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

No. Governor Clinton has a minute after you. Then we have the closing statements.

Right.

Governor Clinton, one minute.

All right. That was the final question and answer, and we now go to the closing statements. Each candidate will have up to 2 minutes. The order was determined by a drawing. Governor Clinton, you are first. Governor.

President Bush, your closing statement, sir.

Mr. Perot, your closing statement, sir.

Thank you, Mr. Perot. Thank you, Mr. President. Thank you, Governor Clinton, for being with us tonight and the previous debates. Thank you to the panel.

The only thing that is left to be said is, from Michigan State University in East Lansing, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you, and good night.Good evening, and welcome to the first of three debates among the major candidates for President of the United States, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The candidates are independent candidate Ross Perot; Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee; and President George Bush, the Republican nominee.
I am Jim Lehrer of "The MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour" on PBS, and I will be the moderator for this 90-minute event, which is taking place before an audience here in the Athletic Complex on the campus of Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri.

Three journalists will be asking questions tonight. They are John Mashek of the Boston Globe; Ann Compton of ABC News; and Sander Vanocur, a freelance journalist. We will follow a format agreed to by representatives of the Clinton and Bush campaigns. That agreement contains no restrictions on the content or subject matter of the questions.

Each candidate will have up to 2 minutes for a closing statement. The order of those as well as the questioning was determined by a drawing. The first question goes to Mr. Perot. He will have 2 minutes to answer, to be followed by rebuttals of one minute each from Governor Clinton and then President Bush.

Gentlemen, good evening. The first topic tonight is what separates each of you from the other. Mr. Perot, what do you believe tonight is the single most important separating issue of this campaign?

Governor Clinton, one-minute response.

President Bush, one-minute response, sir.

Governor Clinton, how do you respond to the President -- you have 2 minutes -- on the question of experience? He says that is what distinguishes him from the other two of you.

President Bush, one minute to respond.

Mr. Perot, a minute response, sir.

President Bush, the question goes to you. You have 2 minutes. And the question is this: Are there important issues of character separating you from these other two men?

Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

Your time is up.

Time is up.

Governor Clinton, you have one minute.

All right. We move now to the subject of taxes and spending. The question goes to Governor Clinton for a two-minute answer. It will be asked by Ann Compton.

Governor Clinton, can you lock in a level here tonight on where middle-income families can be guaranteed a tax cut or, at the very least, at what income level they can be guaranteed no tax increase?

So there will be no tax increases below $200,000?

President Bush, one minute, sir.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

Okay. Next question goes to President Bush for a 2-minute answer, and it will be asked by Sandy Vanocur.

U.S. Troops in Europe

Mr. President, this past week your Secretary of the Army, Michael Stone, said he had no plans to abide by a congressional mandate to cut U.S. forces in Europe from 150,000 to 100,000 by the end of September 1996. Now, why, almost 50 years after the end of World War II and with the total collapse of the Soviet Union, should American taxpayers be taxed, support armies in Europe, when the Europeans have plenty of money to do it for themselves?

Mr. Perot, one minute, sir.

Governor Clinton, one minute, sir.

All right. We go now to Mr. Perot for a 2-minute question, and it will be asked by John Mashek.

Mr. Perot, you talked about fairness just a minute ago, on sharing the pain. As part of your plan to reduce the ballooning Federal deficit, you've suggested that we raise gasoline taxes 50 cents a gallon over 5 years. Why punish the middle-class consumer to such a degree?

Governor Clinton, you have a minute, sir.

President Bush, one minute, sir.

All right. Let's move on now to the subject of jobs. The first question goes to President Bush for 2 minutes, and John will ask that question. John?

Mr. President, last month you came to St. Louis to announce a very lucrative contract for McDonnell Douglas to build F - 15's for Saudi Arabia. In today's Post-Dispatch, a retired saleswoman, a 75-year-old woman named Marjorie Roberts, asked if she could ask a question of the candidates, said she wanted to register her concern about the lack of a plan to convert our defense-oriented industries into other purposes. How would you answer her?

Mr. Perot, you have one minute, sir.

Governor Clinton, you have one minute, sir.

All right. The next question goes to Mr. Perot for a 2 minute answer. It will be asked by Ann.

Ann?

Mr. Perot, you talked a minute ago about rebuilding the job base. But is it true what Governor Clinton just said, that that means that unemployment will increase, that it will slow the economy? And how would you specifically use the powers of the Presidency to get more people back into good jobs immediately?

Governor Clinton, one minute.

President Bush, one minute.

The next question goes to Governor Clinton for 2 minutes. It will be asked by Sandy.

Governor Clinton, when a President running for the first time gets into the office and wants to do something about the economy, he finds in Washington there's a person who has much more power over the economy than he does: the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, accountable to no one. That being the case, would you go along with proposals made by Treasury Secretary James Brady and Congressman Lee Hamilton to make the Federal Reserve Board Chairman somehow more accountable to elected officials?

President Bush, you have one minute.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

We're going to move to foreign affairs. The first question goes to Mr. Perot for a 2-minute answer, and Sandy will ask it.

Mr. Perot, in the post-cold-war environment, what should be the overriding U.S. national interest? And what can the United States do, and what can it afford to do to defend that national interest?

Governor Clinton, one minute.

President Bush, one minute.

All right, Next question is for Governor Clinton, and John will ask it.

China-U.S. Relations

Governor Clinton, you've accused the President of coddling tyrants, including those in Beijing. As President, how would you exert U.S. power to influence affairs in China?

President Bush, you have one minute.

Mr. President, you're over -- --

One minute, Mr. Perot.

All right. The next question goes to President Bush for a 2-minute answer, and Ann will ask it.

Mr. President, how can you watch the killing in Bosnia and the ethnic cleansing, or the starvation and anarchy in Somalia, and not want to use America's might, if not America's military, to try to end that kind of suffering?

Are you designing a mission that would -- --

Ann, sorry, sorry. Time is up. We have to go to Mr. Perot for a one-minute response.

Governor Clinton, one minute.

All right. Moving on now to divisions in our country. The first question goes to Governor Clinton for two minutes, and Ann will ask it.

Governor Clinton, can you tell us what your definition of the word "family" is?

President Bush, one minute.

Mr. Perot, you have one minute.

New question, 2-minute answer, goes to President Bush. Sandy will ask it.

Mr. President, there's been a lot of talk about Harry Truman in this campaign, so much so that I think tomorrow I'll wake up and see him named as the next commissioner of baseball. [Laughter]

The thing that Mr. Truman didn't have to deal with is drugs. Americans are increasingly alarmed about drug-related crimes in cities and suburbs, and your administration is not the first to have grappled with this. Are you at all of a mind that maybe it ought to go to another level, if not to what's advocated by William F. Buckley, Jr., and Milton Friedman, legalization, somewhere between there and where we are now?

Mr. Perot, one minute.

Governor Clinton, one minute.

Next question is to you, Mr. Perot. You have 2 minutes to answer it, and John will ask it.

Mr. Perot, racial division continues to tear apart our great cities, the last episode being this spring in Los Angeles. Why is this still happening in America? And what would you do to end it?

Governor Clinton, one minute.

Mr. President, one minute.

Time, Mr. President. All right, let's go now to another subject, the subject of health. The first question for 2 minutes is to President Bush, and John will ask it.

Mr. President, yesterday tens of thousands of people paraded past the White House to demonstrate their concern about the disease AIDS. A celebrated member of your Commission, Magic Johnson, quit, saying that there was too much inaction. Where is this widespread feeling coming from that your administration is not doing enough about AIDS?

One minute, Mr. Perot.

Governor Clinton, one minute.

New question for Mr. Perot. You have 2 minutes to answer, and Ann will ask it.

Mr. Perot, even if you've got what people say are the guts to take on changes in the most popular and the most sacred of the entitlements, Medicare, people say you haven't a prayer of actually getting anything passed in Washington. Since the President isn't a Lone Ranger, how in the world can you make some of those unpopular changes?

Governor, one minute.

One minute, President Bush.

New question. It is for Governor Clinton, 2-minute answer. Sandy will ask it.

Governor Clinton, Ann Compton has brought up Medicare. I remember in 1965 when Wilbur Mills of Arkansas, the chairman of Ways and Means, was pushing it through the Congress. The charge against it was it's socialized medicine. One, you never -- --

Well, he served with him 2 years later in 1967 where I first met him. The second point, though, is that it is now skyrocketing out of control. People want it; we say it's going bonkers. Is not the Oregon plan, applied to Medicaid rationing, the proper way to go, even though the Federal Government last August ruled that violated the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990?

President Bush, one minute.

Mr. Perot, one minute.

And that's exactly what we're going to do. That was, in fact, the final question and answer. We're now going to move to closing statements. Each candidate will have up to 2 minutes. The order, remember, was determined by a drawing. And Mr. Perot, you were first.

Governor Clinton, your closing statement.

President Bush, your closing statement.

Don't go away yet. I just want to thank the three panelists and thank the three candidates for participating, President Bush, Governor Clinton, and Mr. Perot. They will appear again together on October the 15th and again on October 19th. Next Tuesday there will be a debate among the three candidates for Vice President.

And for now, from Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you, and good night.Good evening, and welcome to the second of three Presidential debates between the major candidates for President of the United States. The candidates are the Republican nominee, President George Bush; the independent, Ross Perot; and Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee.
My name is Carole Simpson, and I will be the moderator for tonight's 90-minute debate which is coming to you from the campus of the University of Richmond in Richmond, Virginia.

Now, tonight's program is unlike any other Presidential debate in history. We're making history now, and it's pretty exciting. An independent polling firm has selected an audience of 209 uncommitted voters from this area. The candidates will be asked questions by these voters on a topic of their choosing, anything they want to ask about. My job as moderator is to, you know, take care of the questioning, ask questions myself if I think there needs to be continuity and balance, and sometimes I might ask the candidates to respond to what another candidate may have said.

Now, the format has been agreed to by representatives of both the Republican and Democratic campaigns, and there is no subject matter that is restricted. Anything goes. We can ask anything. After the debate the candidates will have an opportunity to make a closing statement.

So, President Bush, I think you said it earlier, let's get it on.

And I think the first question is over here.

I'd like to direct my question to Mr. Perot. What will you do as President to open foreign markets to fair competition from American business and to stop unfair competition here at home from foreign countries so that we can bring jobs back to the United States?

Thank you, Mr. Perot. I see that the President has stood up, so he must have something to say about this.

Governor Clinton.

Thank you. I think we have a question over here.

This is for Governor Clinton. In the real world, that is, outside of Washington, DC, compensation and achievement are based on goals defined and achieved. My question is about the deficit. Would you define in specific dollar goals how much you would reduce the deficit in each of the 4 years of a Clinton administration and then enter into a legally binding contract with the American people that if you did not achieve those goals that you would not seek a second term? Answer yes or no, and then comment on your answer, please.

Mr. President?

How about you, Mr. Perot?

You're all wonderful speakers, and I know you have lots more to add. But I have talked to this audience, and they have lots of questions on other topics. Can we move to another topic, please?

We have one up here, I think.

Yes, I'd like to address all the candidates with this question. The amount of time the candidates have spent in this campaign trashing their opponents' character and their programs is depressingly large. Why can't your discussions and proposals reflect the genuine complexity and the difficulty of the issues to try to build a consensus around the best aspects of all proposals?

Who wants to take that one? Mr. Perot, you have an answer for everything, don't you? Go right ahead, sir. [Laughter]

Okay, okay.

Thank you, Mr. Perot. So that seems directed. He would say it's you gentlemen that have been doing that. Mr. Clinton, Governor Clinton, how do you -- President Bush, how would you like to respond?

Mr. President, I am getting time cues, and with all due respect, I'm sorry.

Governor Clinton.

Yes, you do. [Laughter]

May I -- I talked to this audience before you gentlemen came, and I asked them about how they felt about the tenor of the campaign. Would you like to let them know what you thought about that, when I said, "Are you pleased with how the campaign's been going?"

Audience members. No!

Who wants to say why you don't like the way the campaign is going? We have a gentleman back here?

If I may, and forgive the notes here, but I'm shy on camera. The focus of my work as a domestic mediator is meeting the needs of the children that I work with by way of their parents, and not the wants of their parents. I ask the three of you, how can we as, symbolically, the children of the future President, expect the two of you, the three of you, to meet our needs, the needs in housing and in crime and you name it, as opposed to the wants of your political spin doctors and your political parties?

So your question is -- --

Can we focus on the issues and not the personalities and the mud? I think there is a need -- if we could take a poll here with the folks from Gallup, perhaps -- I think there is a real need here to focus at this point on the needs.

How do you respond? How do you gentlemen respond to -- --

President Bush?

Could we cross our hearts, and it sounds silly here, but could we make a commitment? You know, we're not under oath at this point, but could you make a commitment to the citizens of the United States to meet our needs, and we have many, and not yours again? You know, I repeat that; that's a real need I think that we all have.

And you two?

Yes, you may finish.

Yes, very briefly.

Okay.

Thank you. We have a question here.

Yes. I would like to get a response from all three gentlemen. And the question is, what are your plans to improve the physical infrastructure of this Nation, which includes the water system, the sewer system, our transportation systems, et cetera? Thank you.

The cities. Who is going to fix the cities, and how?

Please.

Mr. President, aren't you threatening to veto the bill, the urban aid bill, that included enterprise zones?

Governor Clinton, you're chomping at the bit.

Mr. Perot, what about your plans for the cities? You want to tackle the economy and the deficit first.

Mr. Perot, everybody thought you won the first debate because you were plain-speaking, and you make it sound, oh, so simple. "We'll just do it." What makes you think that you're going to be able to get the Democrats and Republicans together any better than these guys?

Are you answering my question? [Laughter]

No, I want you to tell me how you're going to be able to get the Republicans and Democrats in Congress -- --

-- -- to work together better than these two gentlemen.

Okay. I have a question here.

My question was originally for Governor Clinton, but I think I would welcome a response from all three candidates. As you are aware, crime is rampant in our cities. In the Richmond area, and I'm sure it's happened elsewhere, 12-year-olds are carrying guns to school. And I'm sure when our Founding Fathers wrote the Constitution, they did not mean for the right to bear arms to apply to 12-year-olds. So I'm asking, where do you stand on gun control, and what do you plan to do about it?

Governor Clinton?

Thank you.

President Bush?

Mr. Perot, there are young black males in America dying at unprecedented -- --

Yes, I'm getting -- --

-- -- to the fact that homicide is the leading cause of death among young black males, 15 to 24 years old. What are you going to do to get the guns off the street?

Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Perot.

We have a question up here.

Please state your position on term limits. And if you are in favor of them, how will you get them enacted?

Thank you.

Governor Clinton?

Mr. Perot, would you like to address term limitations?

Thank you very much.

We have a question over here.

I'd like to ask Governor Clinton, do you attribute the rising costs of health care to the medical profession itself, or do you think the problem lies elsewhere? And what specific proposals do you have to tackle this problem?

Thank you. Sorry to cut you short, but, President Bush, health care reform.

Mr. Perot?

Thank you.

Governor Clinton, you wanted one brief point.

Brief, Governor Clinton. Thank you.

We have a question right here.

Yes, how has the national debt personally affected each of your lives? And if it hasn't, how can you honestly find a cure for the economic problems of the common people if you have no experience in what's ailing them?

Well, Mr. Perot, yes, of course.

My question is for each of you, so -- --

Thank you, Mr. Perot.

Mr. President.

She's saying you personally.

You, on a personal basis, how has it affected you?

Has it affected you personally?

How?

What I'm saying -- --

Well, I've had friends that have been laid off in jobs -- --

I know people who cannot afford to pay the mortgage on their homes, their car payment. I have personal problems with the national debt. But how has it affected you? And if you have no experience in it, how can you help us if you don't know what we're feeling?

I think she means more the recession, the economic problems today the country faces rather than -- --

Yes.

Thank you, Governor Clinton. We are a little more than halfway through this program, and I'm glad that we're getting the diversity of questions that we are.

And I don't want to forget these folks on the wings over here, so let's go over here. Do you have a question?

Yes, I do. My name is Ben Smith. I work in the financial field, counseling retirees. And I'm personally concerned about three major areas. One is the Social Security Administration or trust fund is projected to be insolvent by the year 2036. We've funded the trust fund with IOU's in the form of Treasury bonds. The pension guaranty fund which backs up our private retirement plans for retirees is projected to be bankrupt by the year 2026, not to mention the cutbacks by private companies. And Medicare is projected to be bankrupt maybe as soon as 1997.

I would like from each of you a specific response as to what you intend to do for retirees relative to these issues, not generalities but specifics, because I think they're very disturbing issues.

President Bush, may we start with you?

Thank you.

Mr. Perot?

Mr. Perot, can you wrap it up?

But we've got to be fair.

Mr. Perot, I'm sorry, I'm going to -- --

And I don't want to sound-bite you, but we are trying to be fair to everyone.

All right, Governor Clinton.

Thank you. I think we have a question here on international affairs, hopefully.

We've come to a position where we're in the new world order. And I'd like to know what the candidates feel our position is in this new world order and what our responsibilities are as a superpower.

Mr. President?

Thank you.

Mr. Perot.

Governor Clinton, the President mentioned Saddam Hussein. Your vice president and you have had some words about the President and Saddam Hussein. Would you care to comment?

Okay, we have a question up there.

We've talked a lot tonight about creating jobs. But we have an awful lot of high school graduates who don't know how to read a ruler, who cannot fill out an application for a job. How can we create high-paying jobs with the education system we have? And what would you do to change it?

Who would like to begin? The education President?

Governor Clinton?

Thank you, Governor Clinton. What the question is -- what is it going to cost?

What is it going to cost?

What is it going to cost?

Mr. Perot, you on education, please.

No, you don't. [Laughter]

Thank you, Mr. Perot.

Thank you. President Bush, you wanted to add something.

Very briefly.

We have very little time left, and it occurs to me that we have talked all this time and there has not been one question about some of the racial tensions and ethnic tensions in America. Is there anyone in this audience that would like to pose a question to the candidates on this? Yes?

What I'd like to know, and this is to any of the three of you, is aside from the recent accomplishments of your party, aside from those accomplishments in racial representation and without citing any of your current appointments or successful elections, when do you estimate your party will both nominate and elect an Afro-American and female ticket to the Presidency of the United States?

Governor Clinton, why don't you answer that first.

I do, too.

Okay. I'm sorry we have just a little bit of time left. Let's try to get responses from each of them.

President Bush or Mr. Perot?

I said when's your guess?

Excuse me, I'm extremely impressed with that.

Sure. I just wanted to know -- --

I'm totally impressed with that. I just wanted to know is when is your guess of when.

Yeah.

Mr. Perot?

Thank you.

Mr. Perot, I don't want to cut you up any more, but we only have a minute left.

How about a woman?

What about a woman?

Many?

When?

Good.

Thank you. I want to apologize to our audience because there were 209 people here, and there were 209 questions. We only got to a fraction of them, and I'm sorry to those of you that didn't get to ask your questions, but we must move to the conclusion of the program.

It is time now for the 2-minute closing statements. By prior agreement, President Bush will go first.

That's right.

That's right. [Laughter]

Thank you, Mr. President. And now a closing statement from Mr. Perot.

I'm sorry, Mr. Perot. Once again -- --

And finally, last but not least, Governor Clinton.

Thank you, Governor Clinton.

Ladies and gentlemen, this concludes the debate, sponsored by the Bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. I'd like to thank our audience of 209 uncommitted voters who may leave this evening maybe being committed. And hopefully, they'll go to the polls like everyone else on November 3d and vote.

We invite you to join us on the third and final Presidential debate next Monday, October 19th, from the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan.

I'm Carole Simpson. Good night.Good evening from Atlanta and welcome to the vice presidential debate sponsored by the Nonpartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. It's being held here in the Theater for the Arts on the campus of Georgia Tech. I'm Hal Bruno from ABC News and I'm going to be moderating tonight's debate. The participants are Republican Vice President Dan Quayle.
(APPLAUSE)

Democratic Senator Al Gore.

(APPLAUSE)

And retired Vice Admiral James Stockdale, who is the vice presidential nominee --

(APPLAUSE)

-- for independent candidate Ross Perot.

(APPLAUSE)

Now, the ground rules for tonight's debate. Each candidate will have 2 minutes for an opening statement. I will then present the issues to be discussed. For each topic, the candidates will have a minute and 15 seconds to respond. Then this will be followed by a 5 minute discussion period in which they can ask questions of each other if they so choose.

Now, the order of response has been determined by a drawing and we'll rotate with each topic. At the end of the debate, each candidate will have 2 minutes for a closing statement.

Our radio and TV audience should know that the candidates were given an equal allocation of auditorium seats for their supporters. So I'd like to ask the audience here in the theater to please refrain from applause or any partisan demonstration once the debate is under way because it takes time away from the candidates. So with that plea from your moderator let's get started.

And we'll turn first to Senator Gore for his opening statement.

Okay, the next statement will be from Vice President Quayle.

Admiral Stockdale, your opening statement, please, sir?

Thank you, Admiral. I thought since you're running for vice president, that we ought to start off by talking about the vice presidency itself. The vice president presides over the Senate, he casts a deciding vote in case of a tie, but his role really depends on the assignments that are given to him by the president. However, if a president should die in office, or is unable to serve for any other reason, the vice president automatically becomes president, and that has happened 5 times in this century.

So the proposition I put on the table for you to discuss is this.

What role would each of you like to play as vice president, what areas interest you, and what are your qualifications to serve as president, if necessary?

In the case of Vice President Quayle, who we're starting with, I suppose you'd tell us the role that you did play in the first term and which you'd like to do in a 2nd term. Go ahead, sir.

Admiral Stockdale.

Senator Gore.

Again, I will ask the audience: please do not applaud, it takes time from the candidates. All right, now we have 5 minutes for discussion. Go ahead, Vice President Quayle.

Thank you, Mr. Vice President. Admiral Stockdale, it's your turn to respond next, and then Senator Gore will have his chance to respond.

Okay, whatever pleases you gentlemen is fine with me. You're the candidates.

This is not the Senate, where you can trade off time. Go ahead, Senator Gore.

Mr. Vice President, let him say his thoughts, and then you can come in.

Now, wait a minute. The question was about --

Can we give Admiral Stockdale a chance to come in, please --

(APPLAUSE)

And again, audience --

(Simultaneous conversation)

Let's give Admiral Stockdale a chance to come in.

I was a little bit worried that there might not be a free flowing discussion tonight.

(Laughter)

Let's move on to the economy. Specifically the economy was talked about at great length the other night in the presidential debate. Let's talk about a very particular aspect of the economy and that is, getting people back to work. For the average person, the great fear is losing his or her job and many Americans have lost jobs in this recession, which also means the loss of benefits, the loss of a home, the destruction of a family's security. Specifically, how would your administration go about getting people back to work and how long is it going to take? And we start with Admiral Stockdale.

Okay. Senator Gore.

Vice President Quayle.

Admiral. We now throw it open for discussion. Admiral Stockdale, it's your turn to start the discussion.

Senator Gore, getting people back to work.

Okay. I think it's time to move on to our next topic. All 3 of you gentlemen have some expertise in defense and the armed forces. Vice President Quayle and Senator Gore both served on the Senate Armed Services Committee. Admiral Stockdale, of course, has a very distinguished military career.

With the end of the Cold War, everyone agrees that there are going to be major cuts. They've already started in the defense budget. But this country has a long history of neglecting its military needs in peace time and then paying for it with heavy casualties when we're caught unprepared. How much of a defense cut is safe? What happens to the people who are forced to leave the military services, or if they lose their jobs because they're working in defense industries.

I think we start with Senator Gore this time.

Vice President Quayle.

Mr. -- Admiral Stockdale, please.

Senator Gore, would you like to start the discussion period on this topic?

Vice President Quayle, please.

Let him talk, Senator.

Go ahead.

Well, we'll have to move on to another topic.

Sorry, Mr. Vice President.

You'll get plenty of chance to respond, so don't worry.

Well, we ran out of time; according to the agreement, it's time to move on. And I want to stick to the agreement.

But you'll have a chance -- I can see what's happening here: we throw out the topic and then we drift. But that's okay, because I think it's making for a healthy exchange.

(Laughter)

The only thing I would ask of you --

The only thing I would ask of you gentlemen is that when we get to the discussion period, whoever talks first be considerate of the others, because you have a tendency to filibuster.

Okay, I'm not pointing any fingers. Let's talk about the environment -- we'll get away from controversy.

(Laughter)

Everyone wants a safe and clean environment, but there's an ongoing conflict between environmental protection and the need for economic growth and jobs. So the point I throw out on the table is, how do you resolve this conflict between protection of the environment and growth in jobs, and why has it taken so long to deal with basic problems, such as toxic waste dumps, clean air and clean water?

And, Vice President Quayle, it's your turn to start first.

Admiral Stockdale.

Senator Gore.

Okay. Discussion period now. Again, leave time for each other, please. Vice President Quayle, go ahead.

All right. Let's give him a chance to answer.

Let him talk, Mr Vice President. Let the senator talk. Go ahead.

Admiral Stockdale, you had something you wanted to say here?

I'd ask the audience to stop, please.

Sure. We've still got time.

Go ahead, Mr Vice President, there's still time. Not much, though.

Okay, let's move on now. I would like to remind the audience of one thing. Trying to stop you from applauding may be a lost cause. I didn't say anything about hissing, but I do think it is discourteous, and there's no call for that, and it reflects badly on the candidate you're supporting. So let's knock that off.

Let's go on to health care. Health care protection has become a necessity of life in our society, yet millions of Americans are not ensured and the cost of medical treatment is practically out of control.

How do you propose to control these costs and how are you going to provide access to health care for every American?

Let's see, whose turn is it to go now?

I think it's Admiral Stockdale's turn to go first. Go ahead, sir.

Senator Gore.

Mr Vice President.

Admiral Stockdale, would you like to start the discussion period?

Go ahead, Senator.

Mr Vice President.

Go ahead, Senator, quickly.

Senator, I'm going to have to ask you to wrap this one up.

Okay, thanks. Coming out of health care, again trying to avoid controversy, let's talk about the abortion debate.

(Laughter)

Abortion rights has been a bitter controversy in this country for almost 20 years. It's been heightened by the recent Supreme Court decisions. So I'll make it very simple in this question: Where do each of you stand on the issue? What actions will your president's administration take on the abortion question? Will it be a factor in the appointment of federal judges, especially to the Supreme Court? And I believe that Senator Gore goes first.

Vice President Quayle, your turn.

Admiral Stockdale.

That's it?

(APPLAUSE.)

You caught me by surprise. Let's go ahead with the discussion of this issue. Senator Gore.

Let him say it himself. Let him say his own words. Go ahead, Mr Vice President.

Let's stick with the question, Mr Vice President.

Does anybody have any view about the appointment of judges on this?

Let's get on with it. Gentlemen, let's get on with it.

Senator --

Could we give Admiral Stockdale a chance to jump in here if he wants to, if he dares to.

All right. Mr Vice President, you'll have a chance to --

(APPLAUSE)

You'll have a chance in the closing statements.

No, let's move on to another topic.

No, let's move on, gentlemen.

Let's not -- we're not horse trading. We're having a debate. Let's go on. Let's talk about the cities. Because that's where a majority of Americans live, in urban areas, and they're facing a financial and social crisis. They've lost sources of tax revenue. The aid that once came from the federal and state governments has been drastically cut. There's an epidemic of drugs, crime and violence. Their streets, the schools are like war zones. It's becoming increasingly difficult to pay for public education, for transportation, for police and fire protection, the basic services that local government must provide.

Now, everybody says, talks about enterprise zones, that may be part of the solution, but what else are your administrations really going to be willing to do to help the cities?

Vice President Quayle, it's your turn to go first.

Admiral Stockdale.

Senator Gore, please.

Let's start the discussion period right here. Go ahead.

Senator Gore, you wanted to respond?

Go ahead, Senator, Admiral.

Senator, can we stick to the cities, sir?

Stick to the cities.

Go ahead.

Let him respond.

Admiral Stockdale, would you like to have the last word in this period?

We have to go on. What I'm about to say doesn't apply to the debate tonight; it applies to the campaign that's been going on outside this auditorium. With 3 weeks to go, this campaign has at times been very ugly, with the tone being set by personal negative attacks.

As candidates, how does it look from your viewpoint? And are these tactics really necessary? Admiral Stockdale -- it's your turn to go first.

I'm sorry, sir. I was saying that at times this campaign has been very ugly with personal negative attacks. As a candidate, how does it look from where you are and are these tactics really necessary?

Okay, Senator Gore.

Okay. Vice President Quayle.

Go ahead.

All right, gentlemen, the control room advises me that in order to have time for your closing statements, which we certainly want, there simply is not going to be time for a discussion period on this particular topic.

So let's go to the closing statements. You have 2 minutes each. And we'll start with Admiral Stockdale.

Thank you.

(APPLAUSE.)

Senator Gore, your closing statement, sir.

Vice President Quayle.

That concludes this vice presidential debate. I'd like to thank Vice President Quayle, Senator Gore, Admiral Stockdale for being participants.

The next presidential debate is scheduled for this Thursday at 9:00 PM Eastern Time at the University of Richmond in Richmond, Virginia. To all of our viewers and listeners, thank you and good night.

(APPLAUSE)
