Good evening from the Magness Arena at the University of Denver, in Denver, Colorado. I'm Jim Lehrer of the PBS NewsHour, and I welcome you to the first of the 2012 Presidential Debates between President Barack Obama, the Democratic nominee, and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee.
This debate and the next three—two Presidential, one Vice Presidential—are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. Tonight's 90 minutes will be about domestic issues and will follow a format designed by the Commission. There will be six roughly 15-minute segments, with 2-minute answers for the first question, then open discussion for the remainder of each segment.

Thousands of people offered suggestions on segment subjects or questions via the Internet and other means, but I made the final selections. And for the record, they were not submitted for approval to the Commission or the candidates.

The segments, as I announced in advance, will be three on the economy and one each on health care, the role of Government, and governing, with an emphasis throughout on differences, specifics, and choices. Both candidates will also have 2-minute closing statements.

The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, applause, boos, hisses, among other noisy, distracting things so we may all concentrate on what the candidates have to say.

There is a noise exception right now, though, as we welcome President Obama and Governor Romney.

National Economy

Gentlemen, welcome to you both. Let's start the economy, segment one, and let's begin with jobs. What are the major differences between the two of you about how you would go about creating new jobs? You have 2 minutes—each of you have 2 minutes to start. A coin toss has determined, Mr. President, you go first.

Governor Romney, 2 minutes.

Mr. President, please respond directly to what the Governor just said about trickle down—his trickle-down approach, as he said yours is.

Both of you have spoken about a lot of different things. And we're going to try to get through them in as specific a way as we possibly can. But first, Governor Romney, do you have a question that you'd like to ask the President directly about something he just said?

Mr. President.

All right, what is the difference? Let's just stay on taxes for a——

Let's just stay on taxes for a moment here.

What is the difference?

All right. Go ahead.

All right, that's where we started.

Yes. Do you challenge what the Governor just said about his own plan?

All right.

Just for the record——

Excuse me, just so everybody understands, we're way over our first 15 minutes.

It's okay. It's great.

Great, no problem. As long as you all don't have a problem, I don't have a problem.

Because we're still on the economy. We're going to come back to taxes, and we're going to move on to the deficit and a lot of other things too. But go ahead, sir.

Well, you're going to get the first part in the next segment.

That's not how it works.

All right.

All right, let's talk specifics. We're still on the economy. This is theoretically now a second segment, still on the economy, and specifically on what to do about the Federal deficit, the Federal debt. And the question—you each have 2 minutes on this. And Governor Romney, you go first because the President went first on segment one.

And the question is this: What are the differences between the two of you as to how you would go about tackling the deficit problem in this country?

Mr. President, 2 minutes.

Simpson-Bowles——

Mr. President, sorry. Way over the 2 minutes.

Governor, what about Simpson-Bowles? Will you support Simpson-Bowles?

No, I mean do you support Simpson-Bowles?

Let's let him answer the taxes thing for a moment.

Mr. President.

No, about the idea that in order to reduce the deficit, there has to be revenue in addition to cuts.

Is that—that's true, right?

Completely?

Okay.

Yes, but, Mr. President, you're saying in order to get the job done, it's got to be balanced.

Come back to Medicaid, yes.

Let's just——

Let's go. Two seconds——

Two seconds and we're going on, still on the economy, but another part of it. All right, this is segment three, the economy. Entitlements, first answer goes to you, two minutes, Mr. President. Do you see a major difference between the two of you on Social Security?

We'll follow up on this. First, Governor Romney, you have 2 minutes on Social Security and entitlements.

Mr. President.

And you don't support that?

We'll talk about—specifically about health care in a moment. But what—do you support the voucher system, Governor?

What about the voucher——

All right.

Okay.

We'll talk about that in a minute.

Okay.

Yes, we're going to—yes, I want to get to it.

But all I want to do is very quickly——

——before we leave the economy——

No, no, no——

All right.

Wait a minute, Governor. Wait——

Can we—can the two of you agree that the voters have a choice, a clear choice between the two of you on Medicare?

All right. So to finish quickly, briefly on the economy, what is your view about the level of Federal regulation of the economy right now? Is there too much? And in your case, Mr. President, is there—should there be more? Beginning with you—this is not a new 2-minute segment. Just start, and we'll go for a few minutes, and then we're going to go to health care, okay?

Is it successing now, do you think?

Like where? Let me know. Give me——

You want to repeal Dodd-Frank?

Okay. All right.

Well, there's a specific——

Let's get to the—excuse me——

No, no, let's not.

Let's let him respond to this specific on Dodd-Frank and what the Governor just said.

All right——

Okay——

All right. I think we have another clear difference between the two of you. Now let's move to health care, where I know there is a clear difference—[Laughter]—and that has to do with the Affordable Care Act—Obamacare. And it's a 2-minute new segment, and that means 2 minutes each. And you go first, Governor Romney. You want it repealed. You want the Affordable Care Act repealed. Why?

Mr. President, the argument against repeal.

Two minutes is up, sir.

Your 5 seconds went away a long time ago. [Laughter]

All right, Governor, tell the President directly why you think what he just said is wrong about Obamacare.

Let's let the Governor explain what you would do if Obamacare is repealed. How would you replace it? What do you have in mind?

All right. Let's——

We're going to move to——

Well, but——

That is a terrific segue to our next segment, and it's the role of Government. And let's see, role of Government, and it is—you are first on this, Mr. President.

And the question is this: Do you believe—both of you, but you have the first 2 minutes on this, Mr. President—do you believe there's a fundamental difference between the two of you as to how you view the mission of the Federal Government?

Two minutes, Governor, on the role of Government. Your view?

All right, let's go through some specifics in terms of what—how each of you views the role of Government. How do—education: Does the Federal Government have a responsibility to improve the quality of public education in America?

How do you see the Federal Government's responsibility to, as I say, to improve the quality of public education in this country?

Do you think you have a difference with your views and those of Governor Romney on—about education and the Federal Government?

Do you agree, Governor?

Okay, now——

We're running out of time, gentlemen——

——so I think you have a chance—yes, respond to that. Yes, sir, Governor.

All right, gentlemen——

Excuse me, one second.

Excuse me, sir. We've got—we barely have 3 minutes left. I'm not going to grade the two of you and say your answers have been too long or I've done a poor job——

Oh, well, no. But the fact is, Government—the role of Government and governing—we've lost a pod, in other words. So we only have 3 minutes left in the debate before we go to your closing statements. And so I want to ask, finally, here—and remember, we've got 3 minutes total time here. And the question is this: Many of the legislative functions of the Federal Government right now are in a state of paralysis as a result of partisan gridlock. If elected, in your case—if reelected, in your case—what would you do about that? Governor?

What would you do as President?

Mr. President.

That brings us to closing statements. There was a coin toss. Governor Romney, you won the toss and you elected to go last. So you have a closing 2 minutes, Mr. President.

Governor Romney, your 2-minute closing.

Thank you, Governor. Thank you, Mr. President.

The next debate will be the Vice Presidential event on Thursday, October 11, at Centre College in Danville, Kentucky. For now, from the University of Denver, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you, and good night.Good evening from Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. I'm Candy Crowley from CNN's "State of the Union."
We are here for the second Presidential Debate, a town hall sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The Gallup organization chose 82 uncommitted voters from the New York area. Their questions will drive the night. My goal is to give the conversation direction and to ensure questions get answered.

The questions are known to me and my team only. Neither the commission, nor the candidates have seen them. I hope to get to as many questions as possible, and because I am the optimistic sort, I'm sure the candidates will oblige by keeping their answers concise and on point.

Each candidate has as much as 2 minutes to respond to a common question, and there will be a 2-minute follow-up. The audience here in the hall has agreed to be polite and attentive; no cheering, no booing, or outbursts of any sort.

We will set aside that agreement just this once to welcome President Barack Obama and Governor Mitt Romney.

Gentlemen, thank you both for joining us here tonight. We have a lot of folks who have been waiting all day to talk to you, so I want to get right to it.

Governor Romney, as you know, you won the coin toss, so the first question will go to you. And I want to turn to a first-time voter, Jeremy Epstein, who has a question for you.

Mr. President, Governor Romney, as a 20-year-old college student, all I hear from professors, neighbors, and others is that when I graduate, I'll have little chance to get employment. What can you say to reassure me, but more importantly, my parents, that I will be able to sufficiently support myself after I graduate?

2014.

Thank you.

Mr. President.

Let me ask you for a more immediate answer, beginning with Mr. Romney. Just quickly, what can you do? We're looking at a situation where 40 percent of the unemployed have been unemployed for 6 months or more. They don't have the 2 years that Jeremy has. What about those long-term unemployed who need a job right now?

Let me give the President a chance. Go ahead.

Mr. President, the next question is going to be for you here. And Mr. Romney—Governor Romney, there'll be plenty of chances here to go on, but I want to——

——we have all these folks—I will let you absolutely——

Okay. We'll—you certainly will have lots of time here coming up, because I want to move you on to something that's sort of connected to cars here and go over—and we want to get a question from Phillip Tricolla.

Your Energy Secretary, Steven Chu, has now been on record three times stating it's not policy of his Department to help lower gas prices. Do you agree with Secretary Chu that this is not the job of the Energy Department?

Governor, on the subject of gas prices?

Mr. President, let me just see if I can move you to the gist of this question, which is, are we looking at the new normal? I can tell you that tomorrow morning a lot of people in Hempstead will wake up and fill up and they will find that the price of gas is over $4 a gallon. Is it within the purview of the Government to bring those prices down, or are we looking at the new normal?

Let me give——

Mr. President, could you address—because we did finally get to gas prices here—could you address what the Governor said, which is if your energy policy was working, the price of gasoline would not be $4 a gallon here. Is that true?

Mr. President——

I've got to move you along.

And the next question is for you.

Actually, in the follow-up it doesn't quite work like that. [Laughter]

But I'm going to give you a chance here. I promise you, I'm going to. And the next question is for you, so if you want to continue on. But I don't want to leave all these guys sitting here, so——

Okay.

And you're—okay. Thank you, Governor.

We're going to move you along to taxes.

All right, we're going to move you both along to taxes over here and all these folks that have been waiting. Governor, this question is for you. It comes from Mary Polono—Polano, sorry.

Governor Romney, you have stated that if you're elected President you would plan to reduce the tax rates for all the tax brackets and that you would work with the Congress to eliminate some deductions in order to make up for the loss in revenue. Concerning these various deductions—the mortgage deduction, the charitable deductions, the child tax credit, and also the—oh, what's that other credit? [Laughter] I forgot.

Oh, I remember—the education credits, which are important to me because I have children in college. What would be your position on those things, which are important to the middle class?

Thanks, Governor.

Governor Romney, I'm sure you've got a reply there. [Laughter]

Governor, let me ask the President something about what you just said. The Governor says that he is not going to allow the top 5 percent—I believe is what he said—to have a tax cut, that it will all even out, that what he wants to do is give that tax cut to the middle class. Settled?

In what new ways do you intend to rectify the inequalities in the workplace, specifically regarding females making only 72 percent of what their male counterparts earn?

Governor Romney, pay equity for women.

Governor——

Mr. President, why don't you get in on this quickly, please?

Mr. President——

I want to move us along here to Susan Katz, who has a question. And, Governor, it's for you.

Governor Romney, I am an undecided voter because I'm disappointed with the lack of progress I've seen in the last 4 years. However, I do attribute much of America's economic and international problems to the failings and missteps of the Bush administration. Since both you and President Bush are Republicans, I fear a return to the policies of those years should you win this election. What is the biggest difference between you and George W. Bush? And how do you differentiate yourself from George W. Bush?

The timekeepers are all working.

And let me tell you that the last part, it's for the two of you to talk to one another, and it isn't quite as ordered as you think. But go ahead and use this 2 minutes any way you'd like to, the question is on the floor.

Thanks, Governor.

Mr. President.

I want to move you both along to the next question because it's in the same wheelhouse so you will be able to respond. But the President does get this question. I want to call on Michael Jones.

Mr. President, I voted for you in 2008. What have you done or accomplished to earn my vote in 2012? I'm not that optimistic as I was in 2012. Most things I need for everyday living are very expensive.

Mr. President, let me let——

Mr. President, thank you.

Governor.

Governor, I want to move you along. Don't go away, and we'll have plenty of time to respond. We are quite aware of the clock for both of you. But I want to bring in a different subject here. Mr. President, I'll be right back with you. Lorraine Osario has a question for you about a topic we have not heard.

Yes, this is for Governor Romney, and we'll be right with you, Mr. President. Thanks.

Lorraine.

Lorraine. Yes. How are you doing? President.

President. Romney: What do you plan on doing with immigrants without their green card that are currently living here as productive members of society?

Let me get the Governor in here, Mr. President. Let's speak to, if you could, Governor——

——the idea of self-deportation.

I'm sorry——

Go ahead and finish, Governor Romney. Governor Romney, if you could make it short. See all these people, they've been waiting for you. Could you make it short and then——

We are sort of way off topic here, Governor Romney.

We are completely off immigration.

And we've—quickly, Mr. President——

If I could have you sit down, Governor Romney. Thank you.

Mr. President, let me move you on here, please. Mr. President——

Don't go away, though.

Right. Don't go away, because——

——I want you to talk to Kerry Ladka, who has a—wants to switch a topic for us.

Good evening, Mr. President.

It's Kerry. Kerry Ladka.

This question actually comes from a brain trust of my friends at Global Telecom Supply in Mineola yesterday. We were sitting around talking about Libya, and we were reading and became aware of reports that the State Department refused extra security for our Embassy in Benghazi, Libya, prior to the attacks that killed four Americans. Who was it that denied enhanced security and why?

Mr. President, I've got to move us along.

Governor.

Because we're closing in, I want to still get a lot of people in. I want to ask you something, Mr. President, and then have the Governor just quickly. Your Secretary of State, as I'm sure you know, has said that she takes full responsibility for the attack on the diplomatic mission in Benghazi. Does the buck stop with your Secretary of State, as far as what went on here?

Governor, if you want to reply just quickly to this please.

He did, in fact, sir. So let me—call it an act of terror in the Rose Garden. He used the word——

He did call it an act of terror. It did, as well, take 2 weeks or so for the whole idea of there being a riot out there about this tape to come out. You are correct about that.

They did.

Mr. President, let me—I know you—absolutely. But I want to move you on.

And also, people can go to the transcripts and——

——figure out what was said and when.

Because what I want to do, Mr. President, stand there for a second, because I want to introduce you to Nina Gonzalez, who brought up a question that we hear a lot both over the Internet and from this crowd.

President Obama, during the Democratic National Convention in 2008, you stated you wanted to keep AK-47s out of the hands of criminals. What has your administration done or plan to do to limit the availability of assault weapons?

Governor Romney, the question is about assault weapons, AK-47s.

Governor, Governor, if I could, the question was about these assault weapons that once were banned and are no longer banned. I know that you signed an assault weapons ban when you were in Massachusetts. Obviously, with this question, you no longer do support that. Why is that? Given the kind of violence that we see, sometimes with these mass killings, why is that, that you've changed your mind?

So if I could—if you could get people to agree to it, you'd be for it?

Go ahead, Mr. President.

Mr. President, I have to move you along here.

You said you wanted to hear this question, so we need to do it here.

One——

The question, of course, Mr. President, was guns here, so I need to move us along.

The question was guns, so let me bring in another——

I understand.

Okay. Thank you so much.

I want to ask Carol Goldberg to stand up because she gets to a question that both these men have been passionate about. It's for Governor Romney.

The outsourcing of American jobs overseas has taken a toll on our economy. What plans do you have to put back and keep jobs here in the United States?

Mr. President, 2 minutes here because we are then going to go to our last question.

Mr. President, we have a really short time for a quick discussion here: iPad, the Macs, the iPhones, they are all manufactured in China. One of the major reasons is labor is so much cheaper here. How do you convince a great American company to bring that manufacturing back here?

Let me go to the——

Let me go to the President here because we really are——

——because we really are running out of time. And the question is, can we ever get—we can't get wages like that. It can't be sustained here.

Thanks, Mr. President.

Governor Romney.

Governor Romney, I want to introduce you to Barry Green because he's going to have the last question to you first.

Hi, Governor. I think this is a tough question. Each of you, what do you believe is the biggest misperception that the American people have about you as a man and a candidate? Using specific examples, can you take this opportunity to debunk that misperception and set us straight?

Governor.

Mr. President, last 2 minutes belong to you.

President Obama, Governor Romney, thank you for being here tonight.

On that note, we have come to an end of this town hall debate. Our thanks to the participants for their time and to the people of Hofstra University for their hospitality.

The next and final debate takes place Monday night at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Florida. Don't forget to watch. Election day is 3 weeks from today. Don't forget to vote. Goodnight.Good evening from the campus of Lynn University here in Boca Raton, Florida. This is the fourth and last debate of the 2012 campaign, brought to you by the Commission on Presidential Debates. This one is on foreign policy. I'm Bob Schieffer of CBS News.
The questions are mine, and I have not shared them with the candidates or their aides. The audience has taken a vow of silence: no applause, no reaction of any kind, except right now, when we welcome President Barack Obama and Governor Mitt Romney.

They've asked me to divide the evening into segments. I'll pose a question at the beginning of each segment. You'll each have 2 minutes to respond, and then, we will have a general discussion until we move to the next segment.

Tonight's debate, as both of you know, comes on the 50th anniversary of the night that President Kennedy told the world that the Soviet Union had installed nuclear missiles in Cuba, perhaps the closest we've ever come to nuclear war. And it is a sobering reminder that every President faces, at some point, an unexpected threat to our national security from abroad.

So let's begin.

The first segment is the challenge of a changing Middle East and the new face of terrorism. I'm going to put this into two segments, so you'll have two topic questions within this one segment on that subject. The first question, and it concerns Libya.

The controversy over what happened there continues. Four Americans are dead, including an American Ambassador. Questions remain of what happened: What caused it? Was it spontaneous? Was it an intelligence failure? Was it a policy failure? Was there an attempt to mislead people about what really happened?

Governor Romney, you said this was an example of an American policy in the Middle East that is unraveling before our very eyes. I'd like to hear each of you give your thoughts on that. Governor Romney, you won the toss; you go first.

Mr. President.

Well, let's see what the——

We'll get to that. But let's give the President a chance.

I'm going to add a couple of minutes here to give you a chance to respond.

You know what, let him answer, please.

The President's Foreign Policy Agenda

All right.

Let me interject the second topic question in this segment about the Middle East and so on. And that is, you both mentioned—alluded to this, and that is Syria.

The war in Syria has now spilled over into Lebanon. We have, what, more than a hundred people that were killed there in a bomb. There were demonstrations there, eight people dead. Mr. President, it's been more than a year since you saw—you told Asad he had to go. Since then, 30,000 Syrians have died. We've had 300,000 refugees. The war goes on; he's still there. Should we reassess our policy and see if we can find a better way to influence events there? Or is that even possible? And it's you—you go first, sir.

Governor.

All right.

Governor, can I just ask you, would you go beyond what the administration would do? Like, for example, would you put in no-fly zones over Syria?

Could we get a quick response, Mr. President? Because I want to ask about Egypt.

May I ask you, during the Egyptian turmoil, there came a point when you said it was time for President Mubarak to go.

Some in your administration thought perhaps we should have waited a while on that. Do you have any regrets about that?

Governor Romney, I want to hear your response to that. But I would just ask you, would you have stuck with Mubarak?

All right.

You're going to get a chance to respond to that because that's a perfect segue into our next segment, and that is, what is America's role in the world? And that is the question: What do each of you see as our role in the world? And I believe, Governor Romney, it's your turn to go first.

Mr. President.

Governor Romney, wrong and reckless policies?

Let me get back to foreign policy.

Can I just get back to——

Okay.

Gentlemen.

All right.

Governor——

Let me just—I want to try to shift it, because we have heard some of this in the other debates. Governor, you say you want a bigger military, you want a bigger Navy. You don't want to cut defense spending. What I want to ask you—we're talking about financial problems in this country—where are you going to get the money?

But can you do this without driving us deeper into debt?

Can he do that, Mr. President?

Let——

Well, that's what I'm trying to find out about.

All right.

About 30 seconds.

All right.

A lot to cover. I'd like to move to the next segment: red lines, Israel, and Iran. Would either of you—and you'll have 2 minutes, and, President Obama, you have the first go at this one. Would either of you be willing to declare that an attack on Israel is an attack on the United States, which, of course, is the same promise that we give to our close allies like Japan? And if you made such a declaration, would not that deter Iran? It's certainly deterred the Soviet Union for a long, long time when we made that promise to our allies.

Mr. President.

So you're saying we've already made that declaration?

Two minutes.

Let me ask both of you, there are—as you know, there are reports that Iran and the United States, as part of an international group, have agreed in principle to talks about Iran's nuclear program. What is the deal—if there are such talks—what is the deal that you would accept? Mr. President.

All right.

Governor.

What if the Prime Minister of Israel called you on the phone and said: "Our bombers are on the way. We're going to bomb Iran"? What do you say?

So you say it just wouldn't happen.

Okay, well, let's see what——

All right.

All right.

All right, let's go. And that leads us—this takes us right to the next segment, Governor, America's longest war, Afghanistan and Pakistan——

Governor, you get to go first here.

Well, with respect, sir, you had laid out quite a program there.

And we'll give you——

We'll catch up. The United States is scheduled to turn over responsibility for security in Afghanistan to the Afghan Government in 2014. At that point we will withdraw our combat troops, leave a smaller force of Americans—if I understand our policy—in Afghanistan for training purposes. It seems to me the key question here is what do you do if the deadline arrives and it is obvious the Afghans are unable to handle their security? Do we still leave? And I believe, Governor Romney, you go first.

Mr. President.

All right, let me go to Governor Romney, because you talked about Pakistan and what needs to be done there. General Allen, our commander in Afghanistan, says that Americans continue to die at the hands of groups who are supported by Pakistan. We know that Pakistan has arrested the doctor who helped us catch Obamas—bin Laden. It still provides safe haven for terrorists. Yet we continue to give Pakistan billions of dollars. Is it time for us to divorce Pakistan?

Let me ask you, Governor—because we know President Obama's position on this—what is your position on the use of drones?

Let's go to the next segment, because it's a very important one. It is the rise of China and future challenges for America. I want to just begin this by asking both of you—and, Mr. President, you go first this time—what do you believe is the greatest future threat to the national security of this country?

All right. Governor.

Well, Governor, let me just ask you, if you declare them a currency manipulator on day one, some people are—say you're just going to start a trade war with China on day one. Is that—isn't there a risk that that could happen?

Governor——

I think we all love teachers. [Laughter]

Gentlemen, thank you so much for a very vigorous debate. We have come to the end. It is time for closing statements. I believe you're first, Mr. President.

Governor.

Gentlemen, thank you both so much. That brings an end to this year's debates. And we want to thank Lynn University and its students for having us. As I always do at the end of these debates, I leave you with the words of my mom, who said, go vote. [Laughter] It makes you feel big and strong.

Good night.Good evening, and welcome to the first and only vice presidential debate of 2012, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. I'm Martha Raddatz of ABC News, and I am honored to moderate this debate between two men who have dedicated much of their lives to public service.
Tonight's debate is divided between domestic and foreign policy issues. And I'm going to move back and forth between foreign and domestic, since that is what a vice president or president would have to do. We will have nine different segments. At the beginning of each segment, I will ask both candidates a question, and they will each have two minutes to answer. Then I will encourage a discussion between the candidates with follow-up questions.

By coin toss, it has been determined that Vice President Biden will be first to answer the opening question. We have a wonderful audience here at Centre College tonight. You will no doubt hear their enthusiasm at the end of the debate — and right now, as we welcome Vice President Joe Biden and Congressman Paul Ryan. [applause]

OK, you got your little wave to the families in. It's great. Good evening, gentlemen. It really is an honor to be here with both of you.

I would like to begin with Libya. On a rather somber note, one month ago tonight, on the anniversary of 9/11, Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other brave Americans were killed in a terrorist attack in Benghazi. The State Department has now made clear, there were no protesters there.

it was a pre-planned assault by heavily armed men. Wasn't this a massive intelligence failure, Vice President Biden?

Congressman Ryan?

I just want to you about right in the middle of the crisis. Governor Romney, and you're talking about this again tonight, talked about the weakness; talked about apologies from the Obama administration. Was that really appropriate right in the middle of the crisis?

And why is that so?

Be specific.

Can we talk — let me go back to Libya.

What were you first told about the attack? Why — why were people talking about protests? When people in the consulate first saw armed men attacking with guns, there were no protesters. Why did that go on [inaudible]?

And they wanted more security there.

Mr. Ryan, I want to ask you about — the Romney campaign talks a lot about no apologies. He has a book called called "No Apologies." Should the U.S. have apologized for Americans burning Korans in Afghanistan? Should the U.S. apologize for U.S. Marines urinating on Taliban corpses?

Burning Korans, immediately?

Let's move to Iran. I'd actually like to move to Iran, because there's really no bigger national security...

... this country is facing. Both President Obama and Governor Romney have said they will prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, even if that means military action. Last week, former Defense Secretary Bob Gates said a strike on Iran's facilities would not work and, quote, "could prove catastrophic, haunting us for generations." Can the two of you be absolutely clear and specific to the American people how effective would a military strike be? Congressman Ryan?

Vice President Biden?

Congressman Ryan?

How do you do it so quickly? Look, you — you both saw Benjamin Netanyahu hold up that picture of a bomb with a red line and talking about the red line being in spring. So can you solve this, if the Romney-Ryan ticket is elected, can you solve this in two months before spring and avoid nuclear — nuclear...[crosstalk]

You don't agree with that bomb and whether the Israelis...[crosstalk]

But what — what do...[crosstalk]

What does that mean, a bunch of stuff?

Thanks for the translation. OK. [crosstalk]

Congressman Ryan?

Can you tell the American people...

What's worse, another war in the Middle East...

You are acting a little bit like they don't want one.

What about Bob Gates' statement? Let me read that again, "could prove catastrophic, haunting us for generations."

Congressman Ryan?

Well, let me ask you what's worse, war in the Middle East, another war in the Middle East, or a nuclear-armed Iran?

Quickly.

Vice President Biden?

Gentlemen, I want to bring the conversation to a different kind of national security issue, the state of our economy. The number-one issue here at home is jobs. The percentage of unemployed just fell below 8 percent for the first time in 43 months. The Obama administration had projected that it would fall below 6 percent now after the addition of close to a trillion dollars in stimulus money.

So will both of you level with the American people: Can you get unemployment to under 6 percent and how long will it take?

Mr. Ryan?

[inaudible] two-minute answer [inaudible]

Vice president? I have a feeling you have a few things to say here.

Congressman Ryan?

When could you get it below 6 percent?

Go ahead. Go ahead.

You did ask for stimulus money, correct?

I want to move on here to Medicare and entitlements. I think we've gone over this quite enough.

Let's talk about Medicare and entitlements. Both Medicare and Social Security are going broke and taking a larger share of the budget in the process.

Will benefits for Americans under these programs have to change for the programs to survive?

Mr. Ryan?

Vice President Biden, two minutes.

But let — let me ask you this. What — what is your specific plan for seniors who really can't afford to make up the difference in the value of what you call a premium support plan and others call a voucher?

And what...[crosstalk]

How do you make that up?

Vice President Biden, let me ask you, if it could help solve the problem, why not very slowly raise the Medicare eligibility age by two years, as Congressman Ryan suggests?

You were one of the few lawmakers to stand with President Bush when he was seeking to partially privatize Social Security.

Quickly, Vice President?

We're going to — we're going to move...[crosstalk]... very simple question...[crosstalk]

Gentlemen, I would like to move on to a very simple question for both of you, and something tells me I won't get a very simple answer, but let me ask you this.

OK, on to taxes. If your ticket is elected, who will pay more in taxes? Who will pay less? And we're starting with Vice President Biden for two minutes.

Congressman?

Well, let's talk about this 20 percent. You have refused — and, again — to offer specifics on how you pay for that 20 percent across-the-board tax cut. Do you actually have the specifics? Or are you still working on it, and that's why you won't tell voters?

Do you have the specifics? Do you have the...[crosstalk]

Do you know exactly what you're doing?

You'll get time.

No specifics, again.

And you guarantee this math will add up?

Vice President Biden...[crosstalk]

Is he wrong about that?

Mr. Vice President...[crosstalk]

Mr. Vice President, what would you suggest — what would you suggest beyond raising taxes on the wealthy, that would substantially reduce the long-term deficit?

Can you declare anything off-limits?

Can you declare anything off-limits?

Home mortgage deduction?

Home mortgage deduction?

And you're — and you're going to increase the defense budget.

And you're going to increase the defense budget.

So no massive defense increases?

Yes, I do. I do, because that's another math question.

How do you do that?

Let's put the automatic defense cuts aside, OK?

Let's put those aside. No one wants that.

But I want to know how you do the math and have this increase in defense spending?

And what — what national security issues justify an increase?

Drawing down in one war and one war...

Quickly, Vice President Biden on this. I want to move on.

Some of the military. [crosstalk]

Who answers to a civilian leader.

OK. Let's move on to Afghanistan.

I'd like to move on to Afghanistan please. And that's one of the biggest expenditures this country has made, in dollars, and more importantly in lives.

We just passed the sad milestone of losing 2,000 U.S. troops there in this war. More than 50 of them were killed this year by the very Afghan forces we are trying to help.

Now, we've reached the recruiting goal for Afghan forces, we've degraded Al Qaida. So tell me, why not leave now? What more can we really accomplish? Is it worth more American lives?

Vice President Biden?

What — what conditions could justify staying, Congressman Ryan?

Let me go back to this. He says we're absolutely leaving in 2014. You're saying that's not an absolute, but you won't talk about what conditions would justify...[crosstalk]

But you agree with the timeline.

Do you really think that this timeline...[crosstalk]

We have — we have soldiers and Marines. We have Afghan forces murdering our forces over there. The Taliban is, do you think, taking advantage of this timeline?

Let me go back.

Let me go back to the — the surge troops that we put in there. And — and you brought this up, Congressman Ryan. I have talked to a lot of troops. I've talked to senior offices who were concerned that the surge troops were pulled out during the fighting season, and some of them saw that as a political — as a political move. So can you tell me, Vice President Biden, what was the military reason for bringing those surge troops home...

... before the fighting had ended?

The military follows orders. I mean, there — trust me. There are people who were concerned about pulling out on the fighting season.

Let's move — let's move to another war.

Let's move to another war, the civil war in Syria, where there are estimates that more — estimates that more than 25,000, 30,000 people have now been killed. In March of last year, President Obama explained the military action taken in Libya by saying it was in the national interest to go in and prevent further massacres from occurring there. So why doesn't the same logic apply in Syria? Vice President Biden?

Congressman Ryan?

What happens if Assad does not fall, Congressman Ryan? What happens to the region? What happens if he hangs on? What happens if he does?

So what would Romney-Ryan do about that credibility?

What's your criteria...[crosstalk]

What's your criteria...[crosstalk]

Let me ask you a quick question.

What's your criteria for intervention?

Worldwide.

How about humanitarian interests?

No humanitarian?

I want to — we're — we're almost out of time here.

I want to move on, and I want to return home for these last few questions. This debate is, indeed, historic. We have two Catholic candidates, first time, on a stage such as this. And I would like to ask you both to tell me what role your religion has played in your own personal views on abortion.

Please talk about how you came to that decision. Talk about how your religion played a part in that. And, please, this is such an emotional issue for so many people in this country...

... please talk personally about this, if you could.

Congressman Ryan?

Vice President Biden?

Congressman Ryan.

I want to go back to the abortion question here. If the Romney-Ryan ticket is elected, should those who believe that abortion should remain legal be worried?

I'm — I'm going to move on to this closing question because we are running out of time.

Certainly [inaudible] and you've said it here tonight, that the two of you respect our troops enormously. Your son has served and perhaps someday your children will serve as well.

I recently spoke to a highly decorated soldier who said that this presidential campaign has left him dismayed. He told me, quote, "the ads are so negative and they are all tearing down each other rather than building up the country."

What would you say to that American hero about this campaign? And at the end of the day, are you ever embarrassed by the tone?

Vice President Biden?

Congressman Ryan?

You will get just a few minutes here. A few seconds, really.

We're going to — we're going to the closing statements in a minute. [crosstalk] You're going to have your closing statement.

Let me — let me calm down things here just for a minute. And I want to talk to you very briefly before we go to closing statements about your own personal character. If you are elected, what could you both give to this country as a man, as a human being, that no one else could?

Vice President, can we get to that — to that issue of what you could bring as a man, a human being? And I really — I'm going to keep you to about 15 seconds here.

He didn't have 40. He didn't have 40.

OK, we now turn to the candidates for their closing statements. Thank you, gentlemen. And that coin toss, again, has Vice President Biden starting with the closing statement.

Congressman Ryan?

And thank you both again. Thank you very much.

This concludes the vice presidential debate. Please tune in next Tuesday for the second presidential debate at Hofstra University in New York. I'm Martha Raddatz of ABC News. I do hope all of you go to the polls. Have a good evening. [applause]
