Good evening from Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York. I'm Lester Holt, anchor of "NBC Nightly News." I want to welcome you to the first presidential debate.

The participants tonight are Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization. The commission drafted tonight's format, and the rules have been agreed to by the campaigns.

The 90-minute debate is divided into six segments, each 15 minutes long. We'll explore three topic areas tonight: Achieving prosperity; America's direction; and securing America. At the start of each segment, I will ask the same lead-off question to both candidates, and they will each have up to two minutes to respond. From that point until the end of the segment, we'll have an open discussion.

The questions are mine and have not been shared with the commission or the campaigns. The audience here in the room has agreed to remain silent so that we can focus on what the candidates are saying.

I will invite you to applaud, however, at this moment, as we welcome the candidates: Democratic nominee for president of the United States, Hillary Clinton, and Republican nominee for president of the United States, Donald J. Trump. [applause]

Good luck to you. [applause]

Well, I don't expect us to cover all the issues of this campaign tonight, but I remind everyone, there are two more presidential debates scheduled. We are going to focus on many of the issues that voters tell us are most important, and we're going to press for specifics. I am honored to have this role, but this evening belongs to the candidates and, just as important, to the American people.

Candidates, we look forward to hearing you articulate your policies and your positions, as well as your visions and your values. So, let's begin.

We're calling this opening segment "Achieving Prosperity." And central to that is jobs. There are two economic realities in America today. There's been a record six straight years of job growth, and new census numbers show incomes have increased at a record rate after years of stagnation. However, income inequality remains significant, and nearly half of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck.

Beginning with you, Secretary Clinton, why are you a better choice than your opponent to create the kinds of jobs that will put more money into the pockets of American works?

Secretary Clinton, thank you.

Mr. Trump, the same question to you. It's about putting money—more money into the pockets of American workers. You have up to two minutes.

Secretary Clinton, would you like to respond?

Let me follow up with Mr. Trump, if you can. You've talked about creating 25 million jobs, and you've promised to bring back millions of jobs for Americans. How are you going to bring back the industries that have left this country for cheaper labor overseas? How, specifically, are you going to tell American manufacturers that you have to come back?

Let me interrupt just a moment, but...

Back to the question, though. How do you bring back—specifically bring back jobs, American manufacturers? How do you make them bring the jobs back?

Let me let Secretary Clinton get in here.

Mr. Trump?

Very quickly...

Folks, we're going to...

We're going to move to...

Let me get you to pause right there, because we're going to move into—we're going to move into the next segment. We're going to talk taxes...

Please just take 30 seconds and then we're going to go on.

Well, you just opened the next segment.

I'm going to give you a chance right here...

... with a new 15-minute segment...

Mr. Trump, I'm going to...

The next segment, we're continuing...

... achieving prosperity...

OK, you are unpacking a lot here. And we're still on the issue of achieving prosperity. And I want to talk about taxes. The fundamental difference between the two of you concerns the wealthy.

Secretary Clinton, you're calling for a tax increase on the wealthiest Americans. I'd like you to further defend that. And, Mr. Trump, you're calling for tax cuts for the wealthy. I'd like you to defend that. And this next two-minute answer goes to you, Mr. Trump.

All right. You have two minutes of the same question to defend tax increases on the wealthiest Americans, Secretary Clinton.

This is—this is Secretary Clinton's two minutes, please.

Mr. Trump, this is Secretary Clinton's two minutes.

Mr. Trump, we're...

Mr. Trump, we're talking about the burden that Americans have to pay, yet you have not released your tax returns. And the reason nominees have released their returns for decades is so that voters will know if their potential president owes money to—who he owes it to and any business conflicts. Don't Americans have a right to know if there are any conflicts of interest?

The IRS says an audit...

... of your taxes—you're perfectly free to release your taxes during an audit. And so the question, does the public's right to know outweigh your personal...

So it's negotiable?

Well, I'll let her answer that. But let me just admonish the audience one more time. There was an agreement. We did ask you to be silent, so it would be helpful for us. Secretary Clinton?

He also—he also raised the issue of your e-mails. Do you want to respond to that?

Mr. Trump?

We'll let you respond and we'll move on to the next segment.

Let's let Mr. Trump...

Well, we're well behind schedule, so I want to move to our next segment. We move into our next segment talking about America's direction. And let's start by talking about race.

The share of Americans who say race relations are bad in this country is the highest it's been in decades, much of it amplified by shootings of African-Americans by police, as we've seen recently in Charlotte and Tulsa. Race has been a big issue in this campaign, and one of you is going to have to bridge a very wide and bitter gap.

So how do you heal the divide? Secretary Clinton, you get two minutes on this.

All right, Mr. Trump, you have two minutes. How do you heal the divide?

Your two—your two minutes expired, but I do want to follow up. Stop-and-frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York, because it largely singled out black and Hispanic young men.

The argument is that it's a form of racial profiling.

Secretary Clinton...

Secretary Clinton?

Secretary Clinton, last week, you said we've got to do everything possible to improve policing, to go right at implicit bias. Do you believe that police are implicitly biased against black people?

Mr. Trump...

Please.

This conversation is about race. And so, Mr. Trump, I have to ask you for five...

Please—20 seconds.

Please respond, then I've got a quick follow-up for you.

Mr. Trump, let me...

[crosstalk]

Mr. Trump, I...

Mr. Trump, for five years, you perpetuated a false claim that the nation's first black president was not a natural-born citizen. You questioned his legitimacy. In the last couple of weeks, you acknowledged what most Americans have accepted for years: The president was born in the United States. Can you tell us what took you so long?

That was...

[crosstalk]

I will let you respond. It's important. But I just want to get the answer here. The birth certificate was produced in 2011. You've continued to tell the story and question the president's legitimacy in 2012, '13, '14, '15...

.... as recently as January. So the question is, what changed your mind?

I'm sorry. I'm just going to follow up—and I will let you respond to that, because there's a lot there. But we're talking about racial healing in this segment. What do you say to Americans, people of color who...

[crosstalk]

Secretary Clinton?

Mr. Trump, you can respond and we're going to move on to the next segment.

Our next segment is called "Securing America." We want to start with a 21st century war happening every day in this country. Our institutions are under cyber attack, and our secrets are being stolen. So my question is, who's behind it? And how do we fight it?

Secretary Clinton, this answer goes to you.

Your two minutes have expired.

Mr. Trump, you have two minutes and the same question. Who's behind it? And how do we fight it?

Secretary Clinton?

You mention ISIS, and we think of ISIS certainly as over there, but there are American citizens who have been inspired to commit acts of terror on American soil, the latest incident, of course, the bombings we just saw in New York and New Jersey, the knife attack at a mall in Minnesota, in the last year, deadly attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando. I'll ask this to both of you. Tell us specifically how you would prevent homegrown attacks by American citizens, Mr. Trump?

Secretary Clinton?

Mr. Trump...

Please respond.

Mr. Trump, a lot of these are judgment questions. You had supported the war in Iraq before the invasion. What makes your...

In 2002...

My question is, since you supported it...

... why is your—why is your judgment...

The record shows otherwise, but why—why was...

Why was—is your judgment any...

Why is your judgment better than...

My reference was to what you had said in 2002, and my question was...

Why is your judgment—why is your judgment any different than Mrs. Clinton's judgment?

Secretary Clinton?

Secretary Clinton?

We need to move on.

Our last...

Which leads to my next question, as we enter our last segment here on the, still on the subject of securing America. On nuclear weapons, President Obama reportedly considered changing the nation's longstanding policy on first use. Do you support the current policy? Mr. Trump, you have two minutes on that.

Your two minutes is expired.

All right. Mrs. Clinton, Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.

Your two minutes is...

... is expired.

Very quickly. Twenty seconds.

Mr. Trump...

We have just...

We have just a few final questions...

Mr. Trump, this year Secretary Clinton became the first woman nominated for president by a major party. Earlier this month, you said she doesn't have, quote, "a presidential look." She's standing here right now. What did you mean by that?

The quote was, "I just don't think she has the presidential look."

Let's let her respond.

We are at—we are at the final question. [applause]

Very quickly, because we're at the final question now.

Mr. Trump, could we just take 10 seconds and then we ask the final question...

Please very quickly.

We have to move on to the final question.

One of you will not win this election. So my final question to you tonight, are you willing to accept the outcome as the will of the voters? Secretary Clinton?

Mr. Trump, very quickly, same question. Will you accept the outcome as the will of the voters?

Will you accept the outcome of the election?

All right. Well, that is going to do it for us. That concludes our debate for this evening, a spirit one. We covered a lot of ground, not everything as I suspected we would.

The next presidential debates are scheduled for October 9th at Washington University in St. Louis and October 19th at the University of Nevada Las Vegas. The conversation will continue.

A reminder. The vice presidential debate is scheduled for October 4th at Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia. My thanks to Hillary Clinton and to Donald Trump and to Hofstra University for hosting us tonight. Good night, everyone.Ladies and gentlemen the Republican nominee for president, Donald J. Trump, and the Democratic nominee for president, Hillary Clinton. [applause]

Thank you very much for being here. We're going to begin with a question from one of the members in our town hall. Each of you will have two minutes to respond to this question. Secretary Clinton, you won the coin toss, so you'll go first. Our first question comes from Patrice Brock. Patrice?

Thank you, and good evening. The last debate could have been rated as MA, mature audiences, per TV parental guidelines. Knowing that educators assign viewing the presidential debates as students' homework, do you feel you're modeling appropriate and positive behavior for today's youth?

Secretary Clinton, thank you. Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.

Thank you, Mr. Trump. The question from Patrice was about are you both modeling positive and appropriate behavior for today's youth? We received a lot of questions online, Mr. Trump, about the tape that was released on Friday, as you can imagine. You called what you said locker room banter. You described kissing women without consent, grabbing their genitals. That is sexual assault. You bragged that you have sexually assaulted women. Do you understand that?

So, Mr. Trump...

Just for the record, though, are you saying that what you said on that bus 11 years ago that you did not actually kiss women without consent or grope women without consent?

So, for the record, you're saying you never did that?

Have you ever done those things?

Thank you, Mr. Trump.

Thank you, Mr. Trump.

Secretary Clinton, do you want to respond?

And we want to get to some questions from online...

Yes, you can respond to that.

Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump—I want to get to audience questions and online questions.

You're going to have—you're going to get to respond right now.

This tape is generating intense interest. In just 48 hours, it's become the single most talked about story of the entire 2016 election on Facebook, with millions and millions of people discussing it on the social network. As we said a moment ago, we do want to bring in questions from voters around country via social media, and our first stays on this topic. Jeff from Ohio asks on Facebook, "Trump says the campaign has changed him. When did that happen?" So, Mr. Trump, let me add to that. When you walked off that bus at age 59, were you a different man or did that behavior continue until just recently? And you have two minutes for this.

Can we please hold the applause? Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.

Secretary Clinton, I want to follow up on that.

[crosstalk]

I'm going to let you talk about e-mails.

And really, the audience needs to calm down here.

Secretary Clinton...

We want to remind the audience to please not talk out loud. Please do not applaud. You're just wasting time.

And, Secretary Clinton, I do want to follow up on e- mails. You've said your handing of your e-mails was a mistake. You disagreed with FBI Director James Comey, calling your handling of classified information, quote, "extremely careless." The FBI said that there were 110 classified e-mails that were exchanged, eight of which were top secret, and that it was possible hostile actors did gain access to those e-mails. You don't call that extremely careless?

OK, we're going to move on.

We have to move on.

Secretary Clinton, you can respond, and then we got to move on.

We want to give the audience a chance.

Secretary Clinton, you can respond. Then we have to move on to an audience question.

Allow her to respond, please.

Please allow her to respond. She didn't talk while you talked.

Allow her to respond.

We have a question here from Ken Karpowicz. He has a question about health care. Ken?

We brought up the e-mails.

Ken Karpowicz has a question.

Thank you. Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, it is not affordable. Premiums have gone up. Deductibles have gone up. Copays have gone up. Prescriptions have gone up. And the coverage has gone down. What will you do to bring the cost down and make coverage better?

That first one goes to Secretary Clinton, because you started out the last one to the audience.

Secretary Clinton?

Secretary Clinton, your time is up.

Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.

Mr. Trump, your time...

Secretary Clinton, let me follow up with you. Your husband called Obamacare, quote, "the craziest thing in the world," saying that small-business owners are getting killed as premiums double, coverage is cut in half. Was he mistaken or was the mistake simply telling the truth?

Secretary Clinton...

Your time is up.

Mr. Trump, let me follow up on this.

You've said you want to end Obamacare...

You've said you want to end Obamacare. You've also said you want to make coverage accessible for people with pre-existing conditions. How do you force insurance companies to do that if you're no longer mandating that every American get insurance?

What does that mean?

Are you going—are you going to have a mandate that Americans have to have health insurance?

Thank you, Mr. Trump.

Thank you, Mr. Trump.

We now go to Gorbah Hamed with a question for both candidates.

Hi. There are 3.3 million Muslims in the United States, and I'm one of them. You've mentioned working with Muslim nations, but with Islamophobia on the rise, how will you help people like me deal with the consequences of being labeled as a threat to the country after the election is over?

Mr. Trump, you're first.

Secretary Clinton?

Thank you, Secretary Clinton.

Mr. Trump, in December, you said this. "Donald J. Trump is calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country's representatives can figure out what the hell is going on. We have no choice. We have no choice." Your running mate said this week that the Muslim ban is no longer your position. Is that correct? And if it is, was it a mistake to have a religious test?

And why did it morph into that? No, did you—no, answer the question. Do you still believe...

I do.

Would you please explain whether or not the Muslim ban still stands?

And, Secretary Clinton, let me ask you about that, because you have asked for an increase from 10,000 to 65,000 Syrian refugees. We know you want tougher vetting. That's not a perfect system. So why take the risk of having those refugees come into the country?

There's been lots of fact-checking on that. I'd like to move on to an online question...

She did not.

Very quickly, please.

Thank you, Mr. Trump. I want to move on. This next question from the public through the Bipartisan Open Debate Coalition's online forum, where Americans submitted questions that generated millions of votes. This question involves WikiLeaks release of purported excerpts of Secretary Clinton's paid speeches, which she has refused to release, and one line in particular, in which you, Secretary Clinton, purportedly say you need both a public and private position on certain issues. So, Tu, from Virginia asks, is it OK for politicians to be two-faced? Is it acceptable for a politician to have a private stance on issues? Secretary Clinton, your two minutes.

We're going to get to that later. Secretary Clinton, you're out of time.

Mr. Trump?

Thank you, Mr. Trump.

We want to turn, actually, to the topic of taxes. We have a question from Spencer Maass. Spencer?

Good evening. My question is, what specific tax provisions will you change to ensure the wealthiest Americans pay their fair share in taxes?

Mr. Trump, you have two minutes.

Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes. The question was, what specific tax provisions will you change to ensure the wealthiest Americans pay their fair share of taxes?

Thank you, Secretary.

Thank you. I want to give you—Mr. Trump, I want to give you the chance to respond. I just wanted to tell our viewers what she's referring to. In the last month, taxes were the number-one issue on Facebook for the first time in the campaign. The New York Times published three pages of your 1995 tax returns. They show you claimed a $916 million loss, which means you could have avoided paying personal federal income taxes for years. You've said you pay state taxes, employee taxes, real estate taxes, property taxes. You have not answered, though, a simple question. Did you use that $916 million loss to avoid paying personal federal income taxes for years?

So have you paid personal federal income tax?

So can you—can you say how many years you have avoided paying personal federal income taxes?

In the past...

Secretary—I want you to be able to respond, Secretary Clinton.

Allow her to respond.

Please allow her to respond. She didn't interrupt you.

Thank you, secretary.

Thank you, secretary.

We're going to move on to Syria. Both of you have mentioned that.

No, we can—no, Mr. Trump, we're going to go on. This is about the audience.

Mr. Trump, we're going to move on. The heart-breaking video of a 5-year-old Syrian boy named Omran sitting in an ambulance after being pulled from the rubble after an air strike in Aleppo focused the world's attention on the horrors of the war in Syria, with 136 million views on Facebook alone.

But there are much worse images coming out of Aleppo every day now, where in the past few weeks alone, 400 people have been killed, at least 100 of them children. Just days ago, the State Department called for a war crimes investigation of the Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad and its ally, Russia, for their bombardment of Aleppo.

So this next question comes through social media through Facebook. Diane from Pennsylvania asks, if you were president, what would you do about Syria and the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo? Isn't it a lot like the Holocaust when the U.S. waited too long before we helped? Secretary Clinton, we will begin with your two minutes.

Thank you, Secretary Clinton. Mr. Trump?

Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump, your two minutes is up.

Your two minutes is up.

Mr. Trump, let me repeat the question. If you were president...[laughter]...what would you do about Syria and the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo? And I want to remind you what your running mate said. He said provocations by Russia need to be met with American strength and that if Russia continues to be involved in air strikes along with the Syrian government forces of Assad, the United States of America should be prepared to use military force to strike the military targets of the Assad regime.

You disagree with your running mate?

What do you think will happen if Aleppo falls?

What do you think will happen if it falls?

There are sometimes reasons the military does that. Psychological warfare.

It might be to help get civilians out.

Tell me what your strategy is.

I'm going to go to Secretary Clinton. Secretary Clinton, you want Assad to go. You advocated arming rebels, but it looks like that may be too late for Aleppo. You talk about diplomatic efforts. Those have failed. Cease-fires have failed. Would you introduce the threat of U.S. military force beyond a no-fly zone against the Assad regime to back up diplomacy?

But what would you do differently than President Obama is doing?

Thank you very much. We're going to move on...

You had many answers.

We've got a question over here from James Carter. Mr. Carter?

My question is, do you believe you can be a devoted president to all the people in the United States?

That question begins for Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump, thank you.

Your two minutes is up. Secretary Clinton, two minutes?

You have two minutes, Secretary Clinton.

Your time, Secretary Clinton.

Your two minutes is up.

Secretary Clinton, your two minutes is up. I want to follow up on something that Donald Trump actually said to you, a comment you made last month. You said that half of Donald Trump's supporters are, quote, "deplorables, racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic." You later said you regretted saying half. You didn't express regret for using the term "deplorables." To Mr. Carter's question, how can you unite a country if you've written off tens of millions of Americans?

Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary.

I want to give you a minute to respond.

She said some of them are irredeemable.

Mr. Trump, let me follow up with you. In 2008, you wrote in one of your books that the most important characteristic of a good leader is discipline. You said, if a leader doesn't have it, quote, "he or she won't be one for very long." In the days after the first debate, you sent out a series of tweets from 3 a.m. to 5 a.m., including one that told people to check out a sex tape. Is that the discipline of a good leader?

You mentioned sex tape.

The question is, is that the discipline of a good leader?

Secretary Clinton, does Mr. Trump have the discipline to be a good leader?

We have to move along.

Secretary Clinton, we have to...

Secretary Clinton, we're moving.

Secretary Clinton, we are moving to an audience question. We're almost out of time. We have another...

We're moving to an audience question.

Mr. Trump, Secretary Clinton, we want to get to the audience. Thank you very much both of you. [laughter]

We have another audience question. Beth Miller has a question for both candidates.

Good evening. Perhaps the most important aspect of this election is the Supreme Court justice. What would you prioritize as the most important aspect of selecting a Supreme Court justice?

We begin with your two minutes, Secretary Clinton.

Thank you, Secretary Clinton. Thank you. You're out of time. Mr. Trump?

Thank you very much. We're going to get on to one more question.

Thank you.

We have—we have one more question, Mrs. Clinton.

We have one more question from Ken Bone about energy policy. Ken?

What steps will your energy policy take to meet our energy needs, while at the same time remaining environmentally friendly and minimizing job loss for fossil power plant workers?

Mr. Trump, two minutes?

Your time is up. Thank you.

Secretary Clinton, two minutes.

Secretary Clinton...

Your time is up.

Time is up. We have time for one more...

We have...

One more audience question.

We've sneaked in one more question, and it comes from Karl Becker.

Good evening. My question to both of you is, regardless of the current rhetoric, would either of you name one positive thing that you respect in one another? [applause]

Mr. Trump, would you like to go first?

Mr. Trump?

Thanks to both of you.

We want to thank both the candidates. We want to thank the university here. This concludes the town hall meeting. Our thanks to the candidates, the commission, Washington University, and to everybody who watched.

Please tune in on October 19th for the final presidential debate that will take place at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Good night, everyone.Good evening from the Thomas and Mack Center at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. I'm Chris Wallace of Fox News, and I welcome you to the third and final of the 2016 presidential debates between Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.

This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The commission has designed the format: Six roughly 15-minute segments with two-minute answers to the first question, then open discussion for the rest of each segment. Both campaigns have agreed to those rules.

For the record, I decided the topics and the questions in each topic. None of those questions has been shared with the commission or the two candidates. The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, boos, or other interruptions so we and you can focus on what the candidates have to say.

No noise, except right now, as we welcome the Democratic nominee for president, Secretary Clinton, and the Republican nominee for president, Mr. Trump. [applause]

Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump, welcome. Let's get right to it. The first topic is the Supreme Court.

You both talked briefly about the court in the last debate, but I want to drill down on this, because the next president will almost certainly have at least one appointment and likely or possibly two or three appointments.

Which means that you will, in effect, determine the balance of the court for what could be the next quarter century.

First of all, where do you want to see the court take the country? And secondly, what's your view on how the Constitution should be interpreted? Do the founders' words mean what they say or is it a living document to be applied flexibly according to changing circumstances? In this segment, Secretary Clinton, you go first. You have two minutes.

Secretary Clinton, thank you.

Mr. Trump, same question. Where do you want to see the court take the country? And how do you believe the Constitution should be interpreted?

Mr. Trump, thank you.

We now have about 10 minutes for an open discussion. I want to focus on two issues that, in fact, by the justices that you name could end up changing the existing law of the land. First is one that you mentioned, Mr. Trump, and that is guns.

Secretary Clinton, you said last year, let me quote, "The Supreme Court is wrong on the Second Amendment." And now, in fact, in the 2008 Heller case, the court ruled that there is a constitutional right to bear arms, but a right that is reasonably limited. Those were the words of the Judge Antonin Scalia who wrote the decision. What's wrong with that?

Let me bring Mr. Trump in here. The bipartisan Open Debate Coalition got millions of votes on questions to ask here, and this was, in fact, one of the top questions that they got. How will you ensure the Second Amendment is protected? You just heard Secretary Clinton's answer. Does she persuade you that, while you may disagree on regulation, that, in fact, she supports a Second Amendment right to bear arms?

Well, let me bring in Secretary Clinton. Were you extremely upset?

Let me bring Mr. Trump back into this, because, in fact, you oppose any limits on assault weapons, any limits on high- capacity magazines. You support a national right to carry law. Why, sir?

Well, let's pick up on another issue which divides you and the justices that whoever ends up winning this election appoints could have a dramatic effect there, and that's the issue of abortion.

Mr. Trump, you're pro-life. But I want to ask you specifically: Do you want the court, including the justices that you will name, to overturn Roe v. Wade, which includes—in fact, states—a woman's right to abortion?

But I'm asking you specifically. Would you like to...

But what I'm asking you, sir, is, do you want to see the court overturn—you just said you want to see the court protect the Second Amendment. Do you want to see the court overturn Roe v. Wade?

Secretary Clinton?

Secretary Clinton...

I'm going to give you a chance to respond, but I want to ask you, Secretary Clinton, I want to explore how far you believe the right to abortion goes. You have been quoted as saying that the fetus has no constitutional rights. You also voted against a ban on late-term, partial-birth abortions. Why?

Mr. Trump, your reaction? And particularly on this issue of late-term, partial-birth abortions.

All right. But just briefly, I want to move on to another segment...

All right. Let's move on to the subject of immigration. And there is almost no issue that separates the two of you more than the issue of immigration. Actually, there are a lot of issues that separate the two of you.

Mr. Trump, you want to build a wall. Secretary Clinton, you have offered no specific plan for how you want to secure our southern border. Mr. Trump, you are calling for major deportations. Secretary Clinton, you say that within your first 100 days as president you're going to offer a package that includes a pathway to citizenship. The question, really, is, why are you right and your opponent wrong?

Mr. Trump, you go first in this segment. You have two minutes.

Mr. Trump, thank you. Same question to you, Secretary Clinton. Basically, why are you right and Mr. Trump is wrong?

Thank you, Secretary Clinton. I want to follow up...

OK.

Well, let me—wait, wait, sir, let me...

Now, wait. I'd like to hear from...

I'd like to hear—I'd like to hear from Secretary Clinton.

Mr. Trump?

I want to...

Secretary Clinton, I want to...

Well, let me—Secretary...

Secretary Clinton...

Secretary Clinton, excuse me. Secretary Clinton.

Secretary Clinton, I want to clear up your position on this issue, because in a speech you gave to a Brazilian bank, for which you were paid $225,000, we've learned from the WikiLeaks, that you said this, and I want to quote. "My dream is a hemispheric common market with open trade and open borders." So that's the question...

That's the question. Please quiet, everybody. Is that your dream, open borders?

Well?

Hold on—hold on, wait. Hold on, folks. Because we—this is going to end up getting out of control. Let's try to keep it quiet so—for the candidates and for the American people.

Yes?

Wait, but...

Secretary Clinton...

Mr. Trump...

Mr. Trump...[crosstalk]

I do get to ask some questions.

And I would like to ask you this direct question. The top national security officials of this country do believe that Russia has been behind these hacks. Even if you don't know for sure whether they are, do you condemn any interference by Russia in the American election?

You condemn their interference?

I'm not asking—I'm asking do you condemn?

We're a long way away from immigration, but I'm going to let you finish this topic. You got about 45 seconds.

Very quickly.

OK.

We're going to—no, we are going to move on to the next topic, which is the economy. And I hope we handle that as well as we did immigration. You also have very different ideas about how to get the economy growing faster. Secretary Clinton, in your plan, government plays a big role. You see more government spending, more entitlements, more tax credits, more tax penalties. Mr. Trump, you want to get government out with lower taxes and less regulation.

We're going to drill down into this a little bit more. But in this overview, please explain to me why you believe that your plan will create more jobs and growth for this country and your opponent's plan will not. In this round, you go first, Secretary Clinton.

Secretary, thank you. Mr. Trump, why will your plan create more jobs and growth than Secretary Clinton's?

Time, Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump?

Secretary...

Secretary Clinton, I want to pursue your plan, because in many ways it is similar to the Obama stimulus plan in 2009, which has led to the slowest GDP growth since 1949.

Thank you, sir.

You told me in July when we spoke that the problem is that President Obama didn't get to do enough in what he was trying to do with his stimulus. So is your plan basically more—even more of the Obama stimulus?

Mr. Trump, even conservative economists who have looked at your plan say that the numbers don't add up, that your idea, and you've talked about 25 million jobs created, 4 percent...

... growth is unrealistic. And they say—you talk a lot about growing the energy industry. They say with oil prices as low as they are right now, that's unrealistic, as well. Your response, sir?

I want you to give you a chance to briefly speak to that, and then I want to pivot to one-sixth of the economy...

... which is Obamacare. But go ahead, briefly.

Mr. Trump?

Secretary Clinton? Go ahead, Mr. Trump.

All right. We are going to get to foreign hot spots in a few moments, but the next segment is fitness to be president of the United States. Mr. Trump, at the last debate, you said your talk about grabbing women was just that, talk, and that you'd never actually done it. And since then, as we all know, nine women have come forward and have said that you either groped them or kissed them without their consent.

Why would so many different women from so many different circumstances over so many different years, why would they all in this last couple of weeks make up—you deny this—why would they all make up these stories?

Since this is a question for both of you, Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump says what your husband did and that you defended was even worse. Mr. Trump, you go first.

Secretary Clinton?

Her two minutes—sir, her two minutes. Her two minutes.

It's her two minutes.

Mr. Trump...

Please, everybody.

Secretary Clinton?

During the last...

OK.

In this bucket about fitness to be president, there's been a lot of developments over the last 10 days since the last debate. I'd like to ask you about them. These are questions that the American people have.

Secretary Clinton, during your 2009 Senate confirmation hearing, you promised to avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest with your dealing with the Clinton Foundation while you were secretary of state, but e-mails show that donors got special access to you. Those seeking grants for Haiti relief were considered separately from non-donors, and some of those donors got contracts, government contracts, taxpayer money.

Can you really say that you kept your pledge to that Senate committee? And why isn't what happened and what went on between you and the Clinton Foundation, why isn't it what Mr. Trump calls pay to play?

Secretary Clinton...

Secretary Clinton, respectfully, this is—this is an open discussion.

And the specific question went to pay for play. Do you want to talk about that?

Let's ask Mr. Trump.

Please let Mr. Trump speak.

Please let Mr. Trump speak.

[crosstalk]

Secretary Clinton?

All right.

Wasn't some of the money used to settle your lawsuits, sir?

Right. But there was a penalty that was imposed by Palm Beach County, and the money came from your foundation...

... instead of Mar-a-Lago or yourself, sir.

I want to get into one...

I want...

We...

But, no, we heard this...

Mr. Trump, we—OK.

Folks, we heard this...

Folks, we heard this...

Mr. Trump...

Mr. Trump, I want to ask you about one last question in this topic. You have been warning at rallies recently that this election is rigged and that Hillary Clinton is in the process of trying to steal it from you.

Your running mate, Governor Pence, pledged on Sunday that he and you—his words—"will absolutely accept the result of this election." Today your daughter, Ivanka, said the same thing. I want to ask you here on the stage tonight: Do you make the same commitment that you will absolutely—sir, that you will absolutely accept the result of this election?

But, sir, there's...

But...

But, sir, there is a tradition in this country—in fact, one of the prides of this country—is the peaceful transition of power and that no matter how hard-fought a campaign is, that at the end of the campaign that the loser concedes to the winner. Not saying that you're necessarily going to be the loser or the winner, but that the loser concedes to the winner and that the country comes together in part for the good of the country. Are you saying you're not prepared now to commit to that principle?

OK.

Hold on. Hold on, folks. Hold on, folks.

All right.

Hold on, folks. This doesn't do any good for anyone. Let's please continue the debate, and let's move on to the subject of foreign hot spots.

The Iraqi offensive to take back Mosul has begun. If they are successful in pushing ISIS out of that city and out of all of Iraq, the question then becomes, what happens the day after? And that's something that whichever of you ends up—whoever of you ends up as president is going to have to confront.

Will you put U.S. troops into that vacuum to make sure that ISIS doesn't come back or isn't replaced by something even worse? Secretary Clinton, you go first in this segment. You have two minutes.

Mr. Trump, same question. If we are able to push ISIS out of Mosul and out of Iraq, will—would you be willing to put U.S. troops in there to prevent their return or something else?

Sir, your two minutes are up.

Secretary Clinton, it's...[crosstalk]

Wait, wait, wait, Secretary Clinton, it's an open discussion.

Secretary, please let Mr. Trump speak.

Let's turn to Aleppo. Mr. Trump, in the last debate, you were both asked about the situation in the Syrian city of Aleppo. And I want to follow up on that, because you said several things in that debate which were not true, sir. You said that Aleppo has basically fallen. In fact, there—in fact, there are...

It's a catastrophe, but there...

There are a quarter of...

Sir...

Sir, if I may finish my question...

Well, there are a quarter of a million people still living there and being slaughtered.

Yes.

If I may just finish here, and you also said that—that Syria and Russia are busy fighting ISIS. In fact, they have been the ones who've been bombing and shelling eastern Aleppo, and they just announced a humanitarian pause, in effect, admitting that they have been bombing and shelling Aleppo. Would you like to clear that up, sir?

Let me...

Secretary Clinton, you have talked about—and in the last debate and again today—that you would impose a no-fly zone to try to protect the people of Aleppo and to stop the killing there. President Obama has refused to do that because he fears it's going to draw us closer or deeper into the conflict.

And General Joseph Dunford, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, says you impose a no-fly zone, chances are you're going to get into a war—his words—with Syria and Russia. So the question I have is, if you impose a no-fly zone—first of all, how do you respond to their concerns? Secondly, if you impose a no-fly zone and a Russian plane violates that, does President Clinton shoot that plane down?

Folks, I want to get into our final segment.

Real quick.

OK.

Mr. Trump, Secretary Clinton—no, we need to move on to our final segment, and that is the national debt, which has not been discussed until tonight.

Our national debt, as a share of the economy, our GDP, is now 77 percent. That's the highest since just after World War II. But the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget says, Secretary Clinton, under your plan, debt would rise to 86 percent of GDP over the next 10 years. Mr. Trump, under your plan, they say it would rise to 105 percent of GDP over the next 10 years. The question is, why are both of you ignoring this problem? Mr. Trump, you go first.

Secretary Clinton?

Time.

Well, no, sir, because we're running out of time...

OK.

All right. The one last area I want to get into with you in this debate is the fact that the biggest driver of our debt is entitlements, which is 60 percent of all federal spending. Now, the Committee for federal—a Responsible Federal Budget has looked at both of your plans and they say neither of you has a serious plan that is going to solve the fact that Medicare's going to run out of money in the 2020s, Social Security is going to run out of money in the 2030s, and at that time, recipients are going to take huge cuts in their benefits.

So, in effect, the final question I want to ask you in this regard is—and let me start with you, Mr. Trump, would President Trump make a deal to save Medicare and Social Security that included both tax increases and benefit cuts, in effect, a grand bargain on entitlements?

That's not going to help in the entitlements.

And, Secretary Clinton, same question, because at this point, Social Security and Medicare are going to run out, the trust funds are going to run out of money. Will you as president entertain—will you consider a grand bargain, a deal that includes both tax increases and benefit cuts to try to save both programs?

This is—this is the final time, probably to both of your delight, that you're going to be on a stage together in this campaign. I would like to end it on a positive note. You had not agreed to closing statements, but it seems to me in a funny way that might make it more interesting because you haven't prepared closing statements.

So I'd like you each to take—and we're going to put a clock up, a minute, as the final question in the final debate, to tell the American people why they should elect you to be the next president. This is another new mini-segment. Secretary Clinton, it's your turn to go first.

Secretary Clinton, thank you.

Mr. Trump?

Thank you both. [applause]

Secretary Clinton—hold on just a moment, folks. Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump, I want to thank you both for participating in all three of these debates.

That brings to an end this year's debates sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. We want to thank the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and its students for having us. Now the decision is up to you.

While millions have already voted, Election Day, November 8th, is just 20 days away. One thing everyone here can agree on: We hope you will go vote. It is one of the honors and obligations of living in this great country. Thank you, and good night.Good evening. From Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia, and welcome to the first, and only, vice presidential debate of 2016, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.

I'm Elaine Quijano, anchor at CBSN, and correspondent for CBS News. It's an honor to moderate this debate between Senator Tim Kaine and Governor Mike Pence. Both are longtime public servants who are also proud fathers of sons serving in the U.S. Marines.

The campaigns have agreed to the rules of this 90-minute debate. There will be nine different segments covering domestic and foreign policy issues. Each segment will begin with a question to both candidates who will each have two minutes to answer. Then I'll ask follow-up questions to facilitate a discussion between the candidates. By coin toss, it's been determined that Senator Kaine will be first to answer the opening question.

We have an enthusiastic audience tonight. They've agreed to only express that enthusiasm once at the end of the debate and right now as we welcome Governor Mike Pence and Senator Tim Kaine. [applause]

Gentlemen, welcome. It truly is a privilege to be with both of you tonight.

I'd like to start with the topic of presidential leadership. Twenty-eight years ago tomorrow night, Lloyd Bentsen said the vice presidential debate was not about the qualifications for the vice presidency, but about how if tragedy should occur, the vice president has to step in without any margin for error, without time for preparation, to take over the responsibility for the biggest job in the world.

What about your qualities, your skills, and your temperament equip you to step into that role at a moment's notice? Senator Kaine?

Governor Pence?

Senator Kaine, on the campaign trail, you praised Secretary Clinton's character, including her commitment to public service, yet 60 percent of voters don't think she's trustworthy. Why do so many people distrust her? Is it because they have questions about her e-mails and the Clinton Foundation?

Governor Pence, let me ask you, you have said Donald Trump is, quote, "thoughtful, compassionate, and steady." Yet 67 percent of voters feel he is a risky choice, and 65 percent feel he does not have the right kind of temperament to be president. Why do so many Americans think Mr. Trump is simply too erratic?

Well, we're going to get to Russia in just a moment. But I do want to get back to the question at...

Yes, and we will get to that, Senator. We do have that coming up here. But in the meantime, the questions...

Why the disconnect?

And why the disconnect with your running mate?

This is our open discussion.

... Senator, you have an opportunity to respond.

Gentlemen, we'll get to...[crosstalk]

We need to move on to the next topic, gentlemen.

There are a lot of people wondering in this country about the economy. Let's turn to the issue of the economy.

According to the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, neither of your economic plans will reduce the growing $19 trillion gross national debt. In fact, your plans would add even more to it.

Both of you were governors who balanced state budgets. Are you concerned that adding more to the debt could be disastrous for the country. Governor Pence?

Senator Kaine?

On that point, Governor Pence, recently the New York Times released part of Mr. Trump's 1995 tax return and reported that he could have avoided paying federal income taxes for years. Yesterday, Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible. Does that seem fair to you?

Governor...[crosstalk]

Governor, with all due respect, the question was about whether it seems fair to you that Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible.

Senator, I'm going to give you about 30 seconds to respond, and I have question on Social Security for you.

You get very little time, 20 seconds.

Governor?

All right, Gentlemen...

... I need to ask you about Social Security...

Gentlemen...

The people at home cannot understand either one of you when you speak over each other. I would please ask you to wait until it is that the other is finished.

Senator Kaine, on the issue of Social Security, in 18 years, when the Social Security Trust Funds run out of money, you'll be 76. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimates your benefits could be cut by as much as $7,500 per year. What would your administration do to prevent this cut?

Governor Pence, I'll give you an opportunity to respond.

We...

All right. PENCE: Stay on the path that your party has us on, we're going to be in a — in a mountain range of debt. And we're going to face hard choices and...[crosstalk]

Gentleman, I want to move on now.

All right. Let me move on now...

... to the issue of law enforcement and race relations. Law enforcement and race relations. After the Dallas police shooting, Police Chief David Brown said, quote, "We're asking cops to do too much in this country. Every societal failure we put it off on the cops to solve. Not enough mental health funding, not enough drug addiction funding, schools fail, let's give it to the cops."

Do we ask too much of police officers in this country? And how would you specifically address the chief's concerns? Senator Kaine?

Governor Pence?

Governor Pence...[crosstalk]...Governor Pence...

Governor Pence, I have a question on that point.

Your fellow Republican, Governor Pence, Senator Tim Scott, who is African-American, recently spoke on the Senate floor. He said he was stopped seven times by law enforcement in one year.

He said, "I have felt the anger, the frustration, the sadness, and the humiliation that comes with feeling like you're being targeted for nothing more than being just yourself." What would you say to Senator Scott about his experiences?

So what would you say to Senator Scott, Governor?

Governor, the question is about Senator Scott. What would — what would you tell Senator Scott?

All right. I want to turn to our next segment now, immigration. Your running mates have both said that undocumented immigrants who have committed violent crimes should be deported. What would you tell the millions of undocumented immigrants who have not committed violent crimes? Governor Pence?

It is, in fact, the governor's time.

Governor...

Senator Kaine?

Governor, this is Senator Kaine's two minutes, please.

Governor. It is his two minutes, please.

Governor, Mr. Trump has said...

So, Governor, how would these millions of undocumented immigrants leave? Would they be forcibly removed?

Gentleman, I'd like to shift now to the threat of terrorism. Do you think the world today is a safer or more dangerous place than it was eight years ago? Has the terrorist threat increased or decreased? Senator Kaine?

Governor Pence?

Governor Pence, Mr. Trump has proposed extreme vetting of immigrants from parts of the world that export terrorism. But that does not address many of the recent terrorist attacks in the United States, such as the Orlando nightclub massacre and the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey. Those were homegrown, committed by U.S. citizens and legal residents. What specific tools would you use to prevent those kinds of attacks?

Governor, the question was about homegrown.

Governor?

Senator Kaine, let me ask you this. Secretary Clinton...

... has talked about an intelligence surge.

What exactly would an intelligence surge look like? And how would that help identify terrorists with no operational connection to a foreign terrorist organization?

All right. I'd like to turn now to the tragedy in Syria. Two hundred fifty thousand...

You can — you can have 30 seconds, Governor, quickly, please.

And I don't — 30 seconds is on up.

Right.

I'd like to ask you about Syria, Governor.

All right, we are moving on now. Two hundred fifty thousand people...

... one hundred thousand of them children — Governor...

Governor...

Gentlemen, please.

Gentlemen.

Senator Kaine, Governor Pence, please.

I want to turn now to Syria. Two hundred fifty thousand people, 100,000 of them children, are under siege in Aleppo, Syria. Bunker buster bombs, cluster munitions, and incendiary weapons are being dropped on them by Russian and Syrian militaries. Does the U.S. have a responsibility to protect civilians and prevent mass casualties on this scale, Governor Pence?

Governor, your two minutes are up.

Senator Kaine?

The question was about Aleppo, Senator.

Right.

Governor Pence, you had mentioned no-fly zone. Where would you propose setting up a safe zone specifically? How would you keep it safe?

Gentlemen, this is about Syria. I'd like to...[crosstalk]

Gentlemen, we're going to have time to get to Russia here.

And exactly how would those safe zones work? How would they remain safe?

And very quickly, Senator.

We need to talk about Russia. Very quickly, though, Senator, please.

All right.

All right, gentlemen, let's talk about Russia. This is a topic that has come up.

I will give you an opportunity to do that.

Gentlemen, Russia. Russian President Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine, annexed Crimea, and has provided crucial military support to the Assad regime. What steps, if any, would your administration take to counter these actions? Senator Kaine?

Senator, your time is up. Governor?

Senator, please. This is the governor's two minutes.

Senator, please. This is Governor Pence's two minutes.

Governor...

Governor, yesterday, Mr. Trump said...

... quote, "Putin has no respect for Hillary Clinton and no respect for Obama." Why do you think he'll respect a Trump- Pence administration?

Please, Senator, I'll give you a chance to respond.

Senator Kaine?

Senator Kaine, what went wrong with the Russia reset?

And what would do you differently?

All right, I'd like to ask now about North Korea, Iran and the threat of nuclear weapons. North Korea recently conducted its fifth and most powerful nuclear test.

What specific steps would you take to prevent North Korea from developing a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States? Governor Pence?

Governor, your two minutes are up.

Governor, please.

Your two minutes are up, Governor.

Senator Kaine?

Governor, I will give you 30 seconds to respond, because I know you want to, but, again, I would remind you both this was about North Korea. [laughther]

All right, let's turn back to North Korea...

Senator Kaine...

Senator Kaine, if you had intelligence that North Korea was about to launch a missile, a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States, would you take preemptive action?

All right. I'd like to turn to our next segment now. And in this, I'd like to focus on social issues. You have both been open about the role that faith has played in your lives. Can you discuss in detail a time when you struggled to balance your personal faith and a public policy position? Senator Kaine?

Governor Pence?

I do have one final question for you both tonight. It has been a divisive campaign. Senator Kaine, if your ticket wins, what specifically are you going to do to unify the country and reassure the people who voted against you?

Governor, how will you unify the country if you win?

All right, gentlemen, thank you so much.

This concludes the vice presidential debate. My thanks to the candidates, the commission, and to you for watching. Please tune in this Sunday for the second presidential debate at Washington University in St. Louis and the final debate on October 19th at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.

From Farmville, Virginia, I'm Elaine Quijano of CBS News. Good night.
